                      I



THE Rue du Coq d'Or, Paris, seven in the morning.


A succession of furious, choking yells from the street.


Madame Monce, who kept the little hotel opposite mine,


had come out on to the pavement to address a lodger on


the third floor. Her bare feet were stuck into sabots and


her grey hair was streaming down.








   Madame Monce: « Salope! Salope! 


How many times


have I told you not to squash bugs on the wallpaper? Do


you think you've bought the hotel, eh? Why can't you


throw them out of the window like everyone else?





Putain! 





Salope! »








   The woman on the third floor: « Vache


! »



   Thereupon a whole variegated chorus of yells, as


windows were flung open on every side and half the


street joined in the quarrel. They shut up abruptly ten


minutes later, when a squadron of cavalry rode past and


people stopped shouting to look at them.



   I sketch this scene, just to convey something of the


spirit of the Rue du Coq d'Or. Not that quarrels were the


only thing that happened there-but still, we seldom got


through the morning without at least one outburst of


this description. Quarrels, and the desolate cries of


street hawkers, and the shouts of children chasing


orange-peel over the cobbles, and at night loud singing


and the sour reek of the refuse-carts, made up the


atmosphere of the street.



   It was a very narrow street-a ravine of tall, leprous


houses, lurching towards one another in queer atti-


tudes, as though they had all been frozen in the act of


collapse. All the houses were hotels and packed to the


tiles with lodgers, mostly Poles, Arabs and Italians. At 5


the foot of the hotels were tiny bistros, where you could be


drunk for the equivalent of a shilling. On Saturday nights


about a third of the male population of the quarter was


drunk. There was fighting over women, and the Arab


navvies who lived in the cheapest hotels used to conduct


mysterious feuds, and fight them out with chairs and


occasionally revolvers. At night the policemen would


only come through the street two together. It was a fairly


rackety place. And yet amid the noise and dirt lived the


usual respectable French shopkeepers, bakers and


laundresses and the like, keeping themselves to


themselves and quietly piling up small fortunes. It'was


quite a representative Paris slum.



   My hotel was called the H&#244;tel des Trois Moineaux. It


was a dark, rickety warren of five storeys, cut up by


wooden partitions into forty rooms. The rooms were


small and inveterately dirty, for there was no maid,


and Madame F., the patronne, had no time to do any


sweeping. The walls were as thin as matchwood, and


to hide the cracks they had been covered with layer


after layer of pink paper, which had come loose and


housed innumerable bugs. Near the ceiling long lines


of bugs marched all day like columns of soldiers,


and at night came down ravenously hungry, so that


one had to get up every few hours and kill them in


hecatombs. Sometimes when the bugs got too bad


one used to burn sulphur and drive them into the


next room; whereupon the lodger next door would


retort by having his room sulphured, and drive the


bugs back. It was a dirty place, but homelike, for


Madame F. and her husband were good sorts. The


rent of the rooms varied between thirty and fifty


francs a week.



   The lodgers were a floating population, largely


foreigners, who used to turn up without luggage, stay


a week and then disappear again. They were of every


trade-cobblers, bricklayers, stonemasons, navvies,


students, prostitutes, rag-pickers. Some of them were


fantastically poor. In one of the attics there was a


Bulgarian student who made fancy shoes for the Ameri-


can market. From six to twelve he sat on his bed, making


a dozen pairs of shoes and earning thirty-five francs; the


rest of the day he attended lectures at the Sorbonne. He


was studying for the Church, and books of theology lay


face-down on his leather-strewn floor. In another room


lived a Russian woman and her son, who called himself


an artist. The mother worked sixteen hours a day,


darning socks at twenty-five centimes a sock, while the


son, decently dressed, loafed in the Montparnasse caf&#233;s.


One room was let to two different lodgers, one a day


worker and the other a night worker. In another room a


widower shared the same bed with his two grown-up


daughters, both consumptive.



   There were eccentric characters in the hotel. The Paris


slums are a gathering-place for eccentric people -people


who have fallen into solitary, half-mad grooves of life and


given up trying to be normal or decent. Poverty frees them


from ordinary standards of behaviour, just as money frees


people from work. Some of the lodgers in our hotel lived


lives that were curious beyond words.



   There were the Rougiers, for instance, an old, ragged,


dwarfish couple who plied an extraordinary trade. They


used to sell post cards on the Boulevard St. Michel. The


curious thing was that the post cards were sold in sealed


packets as pornographic ones, but were actually photo-


graphs of chateaux on the Loire; the buyers did not discover


this till too late, and of course never complained. The


Rougiers earned about a hundred francs a week, and by


strict economy managed to be always half


starved and half drunk. The filth of their room was


such that one could smell it on the floor below. Accord-


ing to Madame F., neither of the Rougiers had taken off


their clothes for four years.



   Or there was Henri, who worked in the sewers. He


was a tall, melancholy man with curly hair, rather


romantic-looking in his long, sewer-man's boots.


Henri's peculiarity was that he did not speak, except for


the purposes of work, literally for days together. Only a


year before he had been a chauffeur in good employ and


saving money. One day he fell in love, and when the girl


refused him he lost his temper and kicked her. On being


kicked the girl fell desperately in love with Henri, and


for a fortnight they lived together and spent a thousand


francs of Henri's money. Then the girl was unfaithful;


Henri planted a knife in her upper arm and was sent to


prison for six months. As soon as she had been stabbed


the girl fell more in love with Henri than ever, and the


two made up their quarrel and agreed that when Henri


came out of jail he should buy a taxi and they would


marry and settle down. But a fortnight later the girl was


unfaithful again, and when Henri came out she was with


child. Henri did not stab her again. He drew out all his


savings and went on a drinking-bout that ended in


another month's imprisonment; after that he went to


work in the sewers. Nothing would induce Henri to talk.


If you asked him why he worked in the sewers he never


answered, but simply crossed his wrists to signify


handcuffs, and jerked his head southward, towards the


prison. Bad luck seemed to have turned him half-witted


in a single day.



   Or there was R., an Englishman, who lived six


months of the year in Putney with his parents and six


months in France. During his time in France he drank


four litres of wine a day, and six litres on Saturdays;


he had once travelled as far as the Azores, because the


wine there is cheaper than anywhere in Europe. He was a


gentle, domesticated creature, never rowdy or


quarrelsome, and never sober. He would lie in bed till


midday, and from then till midnight he was in his corner


of the bistro, quietly and methodically soaking. While he


soaked he talked, in a refined, womanish voice, about


antique furniture. Except myself, R. was the only


Englishman in the quarter.



   There were plenty of other people who lived lives just


as eccentric as these: Monsieur Jules, the Roumanian,


who had a glass eye and would not admit it, Furex the


Limousin stonemason, Roucolle the miser -he died before


my time, though-old Laurent the rag-merchant, who used


to copy his signature from a slip of paper he carried in his


pocket. It would be fun to write some of their


biographies, if one had time. I am trying to describe the


people in our quarter, not for the mere curiosity, but


because they are all part of the story. Poverty is what I


am writing about, and I had my first contact with poverty


in this slum. The slum, with its dirt and its queer lives,


was first an object-lesson in poverty, and then the


background of my own experiences. It is for that reason


that I try to give some idea of what life was like there.






                          II


L I F E in the quarter. Our





bistro, for instance, at the


foot of the H&#244;tel des Trois Moineaux. A tiny brick-


floored room, half underground, with wine-sodden


tables, and a photograph of a funeral inscribed « Cr&#233;dit


est mort »; and red-sashed workmen carving sausage


with big jack-knives; and Madame F., a splendid


Auvergnat peasant woman with the face of a strong-


minded cow, drinking Malaga all day " for her


stomach"; and games of dice for ap&#233;ritifs; and songs


about «





Les Fraises et Les Framboises, » and about


Madelon, who said, "





Comment &#233;pouser un soldat, moi qui 





aime tout le r&#233;giment? 


»; and extraordinarily public love-


making. Half the hotel used to meet in the bistro in the


evenings. I wish one could find a pub in London a


quarter as cheery.



  One heard queer conversations in the





bistro. As a


sample I give you Charlie, one of the local curiosities,


talking.



   Charlie was a youth of family and education who


had run away from home and lived on occasional


remittances. Picture him very pink and young, with


the fresh cheeks and soft brown hair of a nice little


boy, and lips excessively red and wet, like cherries. His


feet are tiny, his arms abnormally short, his hands


dimpled like a baby's. He has a way of dancing and


capering while he talks, as though he were too happy


and too full of life to keep still for an instant. It is


three in the afternoon, and there is no one in the bistro


except Madame F. and one or two men who are out of


work; but it is all the same to Charlie whom he talks


to, so long as he can talk about himself. He declaims


like an orator on a barricade, rolling the words on his


tongue and gesticulating with his short arms. His


small, rather piggy eyes glitter with enthusiasm. He is,


somehow, profoundly disgusting to see.



   He is talking of love, his favourite subject.



   «





 Ah, l'amour, l'amour! Ah, que les femmes m'ont tu&#233;! 





Alas, messieurs et dames, 


women have been my ruin,


beyond all hope my ruin. At twenty-two I am utterly


worn out and finished. But what things I have learned,


what abysses of wisdom have I not plumbed! How


great a thing it is to have acquired the true wisdom, to


have become in the highest sense of the word a


civilised man, to have become





raffin&#233;, vicieux, » etc. etc.



   "





Messieurs et dames, I perceive that you are sad. Ah,


mais la vie est belle-you must not be sad. Be more gay, I


beseech you!



"


Fill high ze bowl vid Saurian vine, Ve


vill not sink of semes like zese!









   « Ah, que la vie est belle


! Listen,





messieurs et dames, out


of the fullness of my experience I will discourse to you


of love. I will explain to you what is the true meaning


of love-what is the true sensibility, the higher, more


refined pleasure which is known to civilised men alone.


I will tell you of the happiest day of my life. Alas, but I


am past the time when I could know such happiness as


that. It is gone for ever-the very possibility, even the


desire for it, are gone.



   "Listen, then. It was two years ago; my brother was


in Paris-he is a lawyer-and my parents had told him to


find me and take me out to dinner. We hate each other,


my brother and I, but we preferred not to disobey my


parents. We dined, and at dinner he grew very drunk


upon three bottles of Bordeaux. I took him back to his


hotel, and on the way I bought a bottle of brandy, and


when we had arrived I made my brother drink a


tumberful of it-I told him it was something to make


him sober. He drank it, and immediately he fell down


like somebody in a fit, dead drunk. I lifted him up and


propped his back against the bed; then I went through


his pockets. I found eleven hundred francs, and with


that I hurried down the stairs, jumped into a taxi, and


escaped. My brother did not know my address -I was


safe.



   "Where does a man go when he has money? To the





bordels


, naturally. But you do not suppose that I was


going to waste my time on some vulgar debauchery fit


only for navvies? Confound it, one is a civilised man! I


was fastidious, exigeant, you understand, with a


thousand francs in my pocket. It was midnight before I


found what I was looking for. I had fallen in with a very


smart youth of eighteen, dressed en smoking and with his


hair cut





&#224; l'am&#233;ricaine, and we were talking in a quiet





bistro


 away from the boulevards. We understood one


another well, that youth and I. We talked of this and


that, and discussed ways of diverting oneself. Presently


we took a taxi together and were driven away.



   "The taxi stopped in a narrow, solitary street with a


single gas-lamp flaring at the end. There were dark


puddles among the stones. Down one side ran the high,


blank wall of a convent. My guide led me to a tall,


ruinous house with shuttered windows, and knocked


several times at the door. Presently there was a sound of


footsteps and a shooting of bolts, and the door opened a


little. A hand came round the edge of it; it was a large,


crooked hand, that held itself palm upwards under our


noses, demanding money.



   "My guide put his foot between the door and the step.


'How much do you want?' he said.



   " 'A thousand francs,' said a woman's voice. 'Pay up


at once or you don't come in.'



   "I put a thousand francs into the hand and gave the


remaining hundred to my guide: he said good night and


left me. I could hear the voice inside counting the notes,


and then a thin old crow of a woman in a black dress


put her nose out and regarded me suspiciously before


letting me in. It was very dark inside: I could see


nothing except a flaring gas jet that illuminated a patch


of plaster wall, throwing everything else into


deeper shadow. There was a smell of rats and dust.


Without speaking, the old woman lighted a candle at the


gas jet, then hobbled in front of me down a stone


passage to the top of a flight of stone steps.



   " '





Voil&#224;!' she said; 'go down into the cellar there and


do what you like. I shall see nothing, hear nothing, know


nothing. You are free, you understand-perfectly free.'



   "Ha,





messieurs, need I describe to you





forc&#233;ment, you


know it yourselves-that shiver, half of terror and half of


joy, that goes through one at these moments? I crept


down, feeling my way; I could hear my breathing and the


scraping of my shoes on the stones, otherwise all was


silence. At the bottom of the stairs my hand met an


electric switch. I turned it, and a great electrolier of


twelve redglobes flooded the cellarwith a red light. And


behold, I was not in a cellar, but in a bedroom, a great,


rich, garish bedroom, coloured blood red from top to


bottom. Figure it to yourselves,





messieurs et dames! Red


carpet on the floor, red paper on the walls, red plush on


the chairs, even the ceiling red; everywhere red, burning


into the eyes. It was a heavy, stifling red, as though the


light were shining through bowls of blood. At the far end


stood a huge, square bed, with quilts red like the rest,


and on it a girl was lying, dressed in a frock of red velvet.


At the sight of me she shrank away and tried to hide her


knees under the short dress.



   "I had halted by the door. 'Come here, my chicken,' I


called to her.



   "She gave a whimper of fright. With a bound I was


beside the bed; she tried to elude me, but I seized her by


the throat-like this, do you see?-tight! She struggled, she


began to cry out for mercy, but I held her fast, forcing


back her head and staring down into her face. She was


twenty years old, perhaps; her face was the


broad, dull face of a stupid child, but it was coated


with paint and powder, and her blue, stupid eyes,


shining in the red light, wore that shocked, distorted


look that one sees nowhere save in the eyes of these


women. She was some peasant girl, doubtless, whom


her parents had sold into slavery.



   "Without another word I pulled her off the bed and


threw her on to the floor. And then I fell upon her like


a tiger! Ah, the joy, the incomparable rapture of that


time! There,





messieurs et dames, is what I would expound to


you;





voil&#224; (amour! There is the true love, there is the only


thing in the world worth striving for; there is the thing


beside which all your arts and ideals, all your


philosophies and creeds, all your fine words and high


attitudes, are as pale and profitless as ashes. When


one has experienced love-the true love-what is there in


the world that seems more than a mere ghost of joy?



   "More and more savagely I renewed the attack.


Again and again the girl tried to escape; she cried out


for mercy anew, but I laughed at her.



   " 'Mercy!' I said, 'do you suppose I have come here


to show mercy? Do you suppose I have paid a


thousand francs for that?' I swear to you, messieurs et


dames, that if it were not for that accursed law that robs


us of our liberty, I would have murdered her at that


moment.



   « Ah, how she screamed, with what bitter cries of


agony. But there was no one to hear them; down there


under the streets of Paris we were as secure as at the


heart of a pyramid. Tears streamed down the girl's


face, washing away the powder in long, dirty smears.


Ah, that irrecoverable time! You,





messieurs et dames, you


who have not cultivated the finer sensibilities of love,


for you such pleasure is almost beyond conception.


And I too, now that my youth is gone-ah, youth!-


shall never again see life so beautiful as that. It


is finished.



   « Ah yes, it is gone-gone for ever. Ah, the poverty,


the shortness, the disappointment of human joy! For


in reality-car





en r&#233;alit&#233;, what is the duration of the


supreme moment of love? It is nothing, an instant, a


second perhaps. A second of ecstasy, and after that-


dust, ashes, nothingness.



   "And so, just for one instant, I captured the


supreme happiness, the highest and most refined


emotion to which human beings can attain. And in the


same moment it was finished, and I was left-to what?


All my savagery, my passion, were scattered like the


petals of a rose. I was left cold and languid, full. of


vain regrets; in my revulsion I even felt a kind of pity


for the weeping girl on the floor. Is it not nauseous,


that we should be the prey of such mean emotions? I


did not look at the girl again; my sole thought was to


get away. I hastened up the steps of the vault and out


into the street. It was dark and bitterly cold, the


streets were empty, the stones echoed under my heels


with a hollow, lonely ring. All my money was gone, I


had not even the price of a taxi fare. I walked back


alone to my cold, solitary room.



   "But there,





messieurs et dames, that is what I promised


to expound to you. That is Love. That was the happiest


day of my life."



   He was a curious specimen, Charlie. I describe


him, just to show what diverse characters could be


found flourishing in the Coq d'Or quarter.





                       III



I


  L I V E D in the Coq d'Or quarter for about a year


and a half. One day, in summer, I found that I had just


four hundred and fifty francs left, and beyond this


nothing but thirty-six francs a week, which I earned by giving


English lessons. Hitherto I had not thought about the


future, but I now realised that I must do something at


once. I decided to start looking for a job, and-very


luckily, as it turned out-I took the precaution of paying


two hundred francs for a month's rent in advance. With


the other two hundred and fifty francs, besides the


English lessons, I could live a month, and in a month I


should probably find work. I aimed at becoming a guide


to one of the tourist companies, or perhaps an


interpreter. However, a piece of bad luck prevented this.



   One day there turned up at the hotel a young Italian


who called himself a compositor. He was rather an am-


biguous person, for he wore side whiskers, which are


the mark either of an apache or an intellectual, and


nobody was quite certain in which class to put him.


Madame F. did not like the look of him, and made him


pay a week's rent in advance. The Italian paid the rent


and stayed six nights at the hotel. During this time he


managed to prepare some duplicate keys, and on the last


night he robbed a dozen rooms, including mine. Luckily,


he did not find the money that was in my pockets, so I


was not left penniless. I was left with just forty-seven


francs-that is, seven and tenpence.



   This put an end to my plans of looking for work. I


had now got to live at the rate of about six francs a day,


and from the start it was too difficult to leave much


thought for anything else. It was now that my experi-


ences of poverty began-for six francs a day, if not actual


poverty, is on the fringe of it. Six francs is a shilling,


and you can live on a shilling a day in Paris if you know


how. But it is a complicated business.



   It is altogether curious, your first contact with


poverty. You have thought so much about poverty - it


is the thing you have feared all your life, the thing you


knew would happen to you sooner or later; and it is all so


utterly and prosaically different. You thought it would be


quite simple; it is extraordinarily complicated. You


thought it would be terrible; it is merely squalid and


boring. It is the peculiar





lowness of poverty that you


discover first; the shifts that it puts you to, the


complicated meanness, the crust-wiping.



   You discover, for instance, the secrecy attaching to


poverty. At a sudden stroke you have been reduced to an


income of six francs a day. But of course you dare not


admit it-you have got to pretend that you are living


quite as usual. From the start it tangles you in a net of


lies, and even with the lies you can hardly manage it.


You stop sending clothes to the laundry, and the


laundress catches you in the street and asks you why;


you mumble something, and she, thinking you are


sending the clothes elsewhere, is your enemy for life.


The tobacconist keeps asking why you have cut down


your smoking. There are letters you want to answer, and


cannot, because stamps are too expensive. And then


there are your meals-meals are the worst difficulty of


all. Every day at meal-times you go out, ostensibly to a


restaurant, and loaf an hour in the Luxembourg


Gardens, watching the pigeons. Afterwards you smuggle


your food home in your pockets. Your food is bread and


margarine, or bread and wine, and even the nature of the


food is governed by lies. You have to buy rye bread


instead of household bread, because the rye loaves,


though dearer, are round and can be smuggled in your


pockets. This wastes you a franc a day. Sometimes, to


keep up appearances, you have to spend sixty centimes


on a drink, and go correspondingly short of food. Your


linen gets filthy, and you run out of soap and razor-


blades. Your hair wants cutting, and you try to



cut it yourself, with such fearful results that you


have to go the barber after all, and spend the equivalent


of a day's food. All day you are telling lies, and


expensive lies.



   You discover the extreme precariousness of your six


francs a day. Mean disasters happen and rob you of


food. You have spent your last eighty centimes on half a


litre of milk, and are boiling it over the spirit lamp.


While it boils a bug runs down your forearm; you give


the bug a flick with your nail, and it falls, plop! straight


into the milk. There is nothing for it but to throw the


milk away and go foodless.



   You go to the baker's to buy a pound of bread, and


you wait while the girl cuts a pound for another cus-


tomer. She is clumsy, and cuts more than a pound.


"Pardon, monsieur," she says, "I suppose you don't mind


paying two sous extra?" Bread is a franc a pound, and


you have exactly a franc. When you think that you too


might be asked to pay two sous extra, and would have


to confess that you could not, you bolt in panic. It is


hours before you dare venture into a baker's shop again.



   You go to the greengrocer's to spend a franc on a


kilogram of potatoes. But one of the pieces that make up


the franc is a Belgium piece, and the shopman refuses


it. You slink out of the shop, and can never go there


again.



   You have strayed into a respectable quarter, and you


see a prosperous friend coming. To avoid him you dodge


into the nearest caf&#233;. Once in the caf&#233; you must buy


something, so you spend your last fifty centimes on a


glass of black coffee with a dead fly in it. One could


multiply these disasters by the hundred. They are part


of the process of being hard up.



   You discover what it is like to be hungry. With bread


and margarine in your belly, you go out and look


into the shop windows. Everywhere there is food in-


sulting you in huge, wasteful piles; whole dead pigs,


baskets of hot loaves; great yellow blocks of butter,


strings of sausages, mountains of potatoes, vast Gruy&#232;re


cheeses like grindstones. A snivelling self-pity comes


over you at the sight of so much food. You plan to grab a


loaf and run, swallowing it before they catch you; and


you refrain, from pure funk.



   You discover the boredom which is inseparable from


poverty; the times when you have nothing to do and,


being underfed, can interest yourself in nothing. For half


a day at a time you lie on your bed, feeling like the jeune


squelette in Baudelaire's poem. Only food could rouse


you. You discover that a man who has gone even a week


on bread and margarine is not a man any longer, only a


belly with a few accessory organs.



   This-one could describe it further, but it is all in the


same style-is life on six francs a day. Thousands of


people in Paris live it-struggling artists and students,


prostitutes when their luck is out, out-of-work people of


all kinds. It is the suburbs, as it were, of poverty.



   I continued in this style for about three weeks. The


forty-seven francs were soon gone, and I had to do what


I could on thirty-six francs a week from the English


lessons. Being inexperienced, I handled the money


badly, and sometimes I was a day without food. When


this happened I used to sell a few of my clothes, smug-


gling them out of the hotel in small packets and taking


them to a second-hand shop in the Rue de la Montagne


St. Genevi&#232;ve. The shopman was a red-haired Jew, an


extraordinary disagreeable man, who used to fall into


furious rages at the sight of a client. From his manner


One would have supposed that we had done him some


injury by coming to him. « Merde! » he used to shout,


'you here again? What do you think this is? A soup


kitchen?" And he paid incredibly low prices. For a hat


which I had bought for twenty-five shillings and.


scarcely worn he gave five francs; for a good pair of


shoes, five francs; for shirts, a franc each. He always


preferred to exchange rather than buy, and he had a


trick of thrusting some useless article into one's hand


and then pretending that one had accepted it. Once I


saw him take a good overcoat from an old woman, put


two white billiard-balls into her hand, and then push


her rapidly out of the shop before she could protest. It


would have been a pleasure to flatten the Jew's nose, if


only one could have afforded it.



   These three weeks were squalid and uncomfortable,


and evidently there was worse coming, for my rent


would be due before long. Nevertheless, things were not


a quarter as bad as I had expected. For, when you are


approaching poverty, you make one discovery which


outweighs some of the others. You discover boredom and


mean complications and the beginnings of hunger, but


you also discover the great redeeming feature of poverty:


the fact that it annihilates the future. Within certain


limits, it is actually true that the less money you have,


the less you worry. When you have a hundred francs in


the world you are liable to the most craven panics. When


you have only three francs you are quite indifferent; for


three francs will feed you till to-morrow, and you cannot


think further than that. You are bored, but you are not


afraid. You think vaguely, "I shall be starving in a day or


two-shocking, isn't it?" And then the mind wanders to


other topics. A bread and margarine diet does, to some


extent, provide its own anodyne.



   And there is another feeling that is a great consola-


tion in poverty. I believe everyone who has been hard up


has experienced it. It is a feeling of relief, almost of


pleasure, at knowing yourself at last genuinely down


and out. You have talked so often of going to the dogs -


and well, here are the dogs, and you have reached them,


and you can stand it. It takes off a lot of anxiety.





                         IV




ONE day my English lessons ceased abruptly. The


weather was getting hot and one of my pupils, feeling


too lazy to go on with his lessons, dismissed me. The


other disappeared from his lodgings without notice,


owing me twelve francs. I was left with only thirty


centimes and no tobacco. For a day and a half I had


nothing to eat or smoke, and then, too hungry to put it


off any longer, I packed my remaining clothes into my


suitcase and took them to the pawnshop. This put an


end to all pretence of being in funds, for I could not take


my clothes out of the hotel without asking Madame F.'s


leave. I remember, however, how surprised she was at


my asking her instead of removing the clothes on the


sly, shooting the moon being a common trick in our


quarter.



   It was the first time that I had been in a French


pawnshop. One went through grandiose stone portals


(marked, of course, «





Libert&#233;, &#201;galit&#233;, Fraternit&#233;"-they


write that even over the police stations in France) into a


large, bare room like a school classroom, with a counter


and rows of benches. Forty or fifty people were waiting.


One handed one's pledge over the counter and sat down.


Presently, when the clerk had assessed its value he


would call out, « Num&#233;ro such and such, will you take


fifty francs?" Sometimes it was only fifteen francs, or


ten, or five-whatever it was, the whole room knew it.


As I came in the clerk called with an air of offence,


«





Num&#233;ro 83-here!" and gave a little whistle and a


beckon, as though calling a dog.





Num&#233;ro 83 stepped to


the counter; he was an old bearded man, with an over-


coat buttoned up at the neck and frayed trouser-ends.


Without a word the clerk shot the bundle across the


counter-evidently it was worth nothing. It fell to the


ground and came open, displaying four pairs of men's


woollen pants. No one could help laughing. Poor





Num&#233;ro


83 gathered up his pants and shambled out, muttering to


himself.



   The clothes I was pawning, together with the suitcase,


had cost over twenty pounds, and were in good condition.


I thought they must be worth ten pounds, and a quarter


of this (one expects quarter value at a pawnshop) was


two hundred and fifty or three hundred francs. I waited


without anxiety, expecting two hundred francs at the


worst.



   At last the clerk called my number: «





Num&#233;ro 97!"



   "Yes," I said, standing up.



   "Seventy francs?"



   Seventy francs for ten pounds' worth of clothes! But it


was no use arguing; I had seen someone else attempt to


argue, and the clerk had instantly refused the pledge. I


took the money and the pawnticket and walked out. I


had now no clothes except what I stood up in-the coat


badly out at the elbow-an overcoat, moderately pawnable,


and one spare shirt. Afterwards, when it was too late, I


learned that it was wiser to go to a pawnshop in the


afternoon. The clerks are French, and, like most French


people, are in a bad temper till they have eaten their


lunch.



   When I got home, Madame F. was sweeping the


bistro floor. She came up the steps to meet me. I could


see in her eye that she was uneasy about my rent.



   "Well," she said, "what did you get for your clothes?


Not much, eh?"



   "Two hundred francs," I said promptly.



   "





Tiens!" she said, surprised; "well, that's not bad.


How expensive those English clothes must be!"



   The lie saved a lot of trouble, and, strangely enough, it


came true. A few days later I did receive exactly two


hundred francs due to me for a newspaper article, and,


though it hurt to do it, I at once paid every penny of it in


rent. So, though I came near to starving in the following


weeks, I was hardly ever without a roof.



   It was now absolutely necessary to find work, and I


remembered a friend of mine, a Russian waiter named


Boris, who might be able to help me. I had first met him


in the public ward of a hospital, where he was being


treated for arthritis in the left leg. He had told me to come


to him if I were ever in difficulties.



   I must say something about Boris, for he was a


curious character and my close friend for a long time. He


was a big, soldierly man of about thirty-five, and had


been good-looking, but since his illness he had grown im-


mensely fat from lying in bed. Like most Russian


refugees, he had had an adventurous life. His parents,


killed in the Revolution, had been rich people, and he had


served through the war in the Second Siberian Rifles,


which, according to him, was the best regiment in the


Russian Army. After the war he had first worked in a


brush factory, then as a porter at Les Halles, then had


become a dishwasher, and had finally worked his way up


to be a waiter. When he fell ill he was at the H&#244;tel Scribe,


and taking a hundred francs a day in tips. His ambition


was to become a maitre d'hdtel, save fifty thousand


francs, and set up a small, select restaurant on the Right


Bank.



   Boris always talked of the war as the happiest time


0f his life. War and soldiering were his passion; he


had read innumerable books 0f strategy and military


history, and could tell you all about the theories 0f


Napoleon, Kutuzof, Clausewitz, Moltke and Foch.


Anything to do with soldiers pleased him. His favourite


caf&#233; was the Closerie des Lilas in Montparnasse,


simply because the statue 0f Marshal Ney stands


outside it. Later 0n, Boris and I sometimes went to the


Rue du Commerce together. If we went by Metro, Boris


always got out at Cambronne station instead 0f


Commerce, though Commerce was nearer; he liked the


association with General Cambronne, who was called


on to surrender at Waterloo, and answered simply,


«





Merde! »



   The only things left to Boris by the Revolution were


his medals and some photographs of his old regiment;


he had kept these when everything else went to the


pawnshop. Almost every day he would spread the


photographs out on the bed and talk about them:



   "





Voila, mon ami! There you see me at the head 0f my


company. Fine big men, eh? Not like these little rats 0f


Frenchmen. A captain at twenty-not bad, eh? Yes, a


captain in the Second Siberian Rifles; and my father


was a colonel.



   «





Ah, mais, mon ami, the ups and downs of life! A


captain in the Russian Army, and then, piff! the Revo-


lution-every penny gone. In 1916 I stayed a week at the


Hotel &#201;douard Sept; in 1920 I was trying for a job as


night watchman there. I have been night watchman,


cellarman, floor scrubber, dishwasher, porter, lavatory


attendant. I have tipped waiters, and I have been


tipped by waiters.



   « Ah, but I have known what it is to live like a


gentleman,





mon ami. I do not say it to boast, but the


other day I was trying to compute how many


mistresses I have had in my life, and I made it out to


be over two hundred. Yes, at least two hundred . . . Ah, well,





ca reviendra


. Victory is to him who fights the longest.


Courage!" etc. etc.



   Boris had a queer, changeable nature. He always


wished himself back in the army, but he had also been


a waiter long enough t0 acquire the waiter's outlook.


Though he had never saved more than a few thousand


francs, he took it for granted that in the end he would


be able to set up his own restaurant and grow rich. All


waiters, I afterwards found, talk and think of this; it is


what reconciles them to being waiters. Boris used to


talk interestingly about hotel life:



   "Waiting is a gamble," he used to say; "you may die


poor, you may make your fortune in a year. You are


not paid wages, you depend on tips-ten per cent. of the


bill, and a commission from the wine companies on


champagne corks. Sometimes the tips are enormous.


The barman at Maxim's, for instance, makes five


hundred francs a day. More than five hundred, in the


season. . . . I have made two hundred francs a day


myself. It was at a hotel in Biarritz, in the season. The


whole staff, from the manager down to the





plongeurs,


was working twenty-one hours a day. Twenty-one


hours' work and two and a half hours in bed, for a


month on end. Still, it was worth it, at two hundred


francs a day.



   "You never know when a stroke of luck is coming.


Once when I was at the H&#244;tel Royal an American


customer sent for me before dinner and ordered


twentyfour brandy cocktails. I brought them all


together on a tray, in twenty-four glasses. 'Now,





garcon


,' said the customer (he was drunk), 'I'll drink


twelve and you'll drink twelve, and if you can walk to


the door afterwards you get a hundred francs.' I


walked to the door, and he gave me a hundred francs.


And every night for six days he did the same thing; twelve


brandy


  cocktails, then a hundred francs. A few months later


I heard he had been extradited by the American


Governmentembezzlement. There is something fine, do


you not think, about these Americans?"



   I liked Boris, and we had interesting times together,


playing chess and talking about war and hotels. Boris


used often to suggest that I should become a waiter.


"The life would suit you," he used to say; "when you are


in work, with a hundred francs a day and a nice mistress,


it's not bad. You say you go in for writing. Writing is


bosh. There is only one way to make money at writing,


and that is to marry a publisher's daughter. But you


would make a good waiter if you shaved that moustache


off. You are tall and you speak English those are the


chief things a waiter needs. Wait till I can bend this


accursed leg,





 mon ami. And then, if you are ever out of


a job, come to me."



   Now that I was short of my rent, and getting hungry,


I remembered Boris's promise, and decided to look him


up at once. I did not hope to become a waiter so easily


as he had promised, but of course I knew how to scrub


dishes, and no doubt he could get me a job in the


kitchen. He had said that dishwashing jobs were to be


had for the asking during the summer. It was a great


relief to remember that I had after all one influential


friend to fall back on.





                           V



A SHORT time before, Boris had given me an address


in the Rue du March&#233; des Blancs Manteaux. All he had


said in his letter was that "things were not marching too


badly," and I assumed that he was back


at the H&#244;tel Scribe, touching his hundred francs a


day. I was full of hope, and wondered why I had been


fool enough not to go to Boris before. I saw myself in a


cosy restaurant, with jolly cooks singing love-songs as


they broke eggs into the pan, and five solid meals a day.


I even squandered two francs-fifty on a packet of


Gaulois Bleu, in anticipation of my wages.



   In the morning I walked down to the Rue du March&#233;


des Blancs Manteaux; with a shock, I found it a slummy


back street as bad as my own. Boris's hotel was the


dirtiest hotel in the street. From its dark doorway there


came out a vile, sour odour, a mixture of slops and


synthetic soup-it was Bouillon Zip, twenty-five


centimes a packet. A misgiving came over me. People


who drink Bouillon Zip are starving, or near it. Could


Boris possibly be earning a hundred francs a day? A


surly patron, sitting in the office, said to me, Yes, the


Russian was at home-in the attic. I went up six flights of


narrow, winding stairs, the Bouillon Zip growing


stronger as one got higher. Boris did not answer when I


knocked at his door, so I opened it and went in.



   The room was an attic, ten feet square, lighted only


by a skylight, its sole furniture a narrow iron bedstead, a


chair, and a washhand-stand with one game leg. A long


S-shaped chain of bugs marched slowly across the wall


above the bed. Boris was lying asleep, naked, his large


belly making a mound under the grimy sheet. His chest


was spotted with insect bites. As I came in he woke up,


rubbed his eyes, and groaned deeply.



   "Name of Jesus Christ!" he exclaimed, "oh, name of


Jesus Christ, my back! Curse it, I believe my back is


broken!"



   "What's the matter?" I exclaimed.



   "My back is broken, that is all. I have spent the night


on the floor. Oh, name of Jesus Christ! If you knew


what my back feels like!"



   "My dear Boris, are you ill?"



   "Not ill, only starving-yes, starving to death if this


goes on much longer. Besides sleeping on the floor, I


have lived on two francs a day for weeks past. It is


fearful. You have come at a bad moment, mon ami. »



   It did not seem much use to ask whether Boris still


had his job at the H&#244;tel Scribe. I hurried downstairs


and bought a loaf of bread. Boris threw himself on the


bread and ate half of it, after which he felt better, sat


up in bed, and told me what was the matter with him.


He had failed to get a job after leaving the hospital,


because he was still very lame, and he had spent all


his money and pawned everything, and finally starved


for several days. He had slept a week on the quay


under the Pont d'Austerlitz, among some empty wine


barrels. For the past fortnight he had been living in


this room, together with a Jew, a mechanic. It -


appeared (there was some complicated explanation)


that the Jew owed Boris three hundred francs, and


was repaying this by letting him sleep on the floor and


allowing him two francs a day for food. Two francs


would buy a bowl of coffee and three rolls. The Jew


went to work at seven in the mornings, and after that


Boris would leave his sleepingplace (it was beneath the


skylight, which let in the rain) and get into the bed. He


could not sleep much even there owing to the bugs,


but it rested his back after the floor.



   It was a great disappointment, when I had come to


Boris for help, to find him even worse off than myself. I


explained that I had only about sixty francs left and


must get a job immediately. By this time, however,


Boris had eaten the rest of the bread and was feeling


cheerful and talkative. He said carelessly:



   "Good heavens, what are you worrying about? Sixty


francs-why, it's a fortune! Please hand me that shoe,


mon ami. I'm going to smash some of those bugs if they


come within reach."



   "But do you think there's any chance of getting a



job?"



   "Chance? It's a certainty. In fact, I have got some-


thing already. There is a new Russian restaurant which


is to open in a few days in the Rue du Commerce. It is





une chose entendue 


that I am to be





maitre d'h&#244;tel. I can


easily get you a job in the kitchen. Five hundred francs


a month and your food-tips, too, if you are lucky."



   "But in the meantime? I've got to pay my rent before


long."



   "Oh, we shall find something. I have got a few cards


up my sleeve. There are people who owe me money, for


"instance-Paris is full of them. One of them is bound to


pay up before long. Then think of all the women who


have been my mistress! A woman never forgets, you


know-I have only to ask and they will help me. 'Besides,


the Jew tells me he is going to steal some magnetos


from the garage where he works, and he will pay us five


francs a day to clean them before he sells them. That


alone would keep us. Never worry, mon ami. Nothing is


easier to get than money."



   "Well, let's go out now and look for a job."



   "Presently, mon ami. We shan't starve, don't you fear.


This is only the fortune of war-I've been in a worse hole


scores of times. It's only a question of persisting.


Remember Foch's maxim: '





Attaquez! Attaquez! Attaquez!' "



   It was midday before Boris decided to get up. All the


clothes he now had left were one suit, with one shirt,


collar and tie, a pair of shoes almost worn out, and a


pair of socks all holes. He had also an overcoat which


was to be pawned in the last extremity. He had


a suitcase, a wretched twenty-franc carboard thing, but


very important, because the





patron of the hotel believed


that it was full of clothes-without that, he would


probably have turned Boris out of doors. What it


actually contained were the medals and photographs,


various odds and ends, and huge bundles of loveletters.


In spite of all this Boris managed to keep a fairly smart


appearance. He shaved without soap and with a razor-


blade two months old, tied his tie so that the holes did


not show, and carefully stuffed the soles of his shoes


with newspaper. Finally, when he was dressed, he


produced an ink-bottle and inked the skin of his ankles


where it showed through his socks. You would never


have thought, when it was finished, that he had recently


been sleeping under the Seine bridges.



   We went to a small caf&#233; off the Rue de Rivoli, a well-


known rendezvous of hotel managers and employees. At


the back was a, dark, cave-like room where all kinds of


hotel workers were sitting-smart young waiters, others


not so smart and clearly hungry, fat pink cooks, greasy


dishwashers, battered old scrubbing-women. Everyone


had an untouched glass of black coffee in front of him.


The place was, in effect, an employment bureau, and the


money spent on drinks was the patron's commission.


Sometimes a stout, importantlooking man, obviously a


restaurateur, would come in and speak to the barman,


and the barman would call to one of the people at the


back of the caf&#233;. But he never called to Boris or me, and


we left after two hours, as the etiquette was that you


could only stay two hours for one drink. We learned


afterwards, when it was too late, that the dodge was to


bribe the barman; if you could afford twenty francs he


would generally get you a job.



   We went to the H&#244;tel Scribe and waited an hour on


the pavement, hoping that the manager would come


out, but he never did. Then we dragged ourselves down


to the Rue du Commerce, only to find that the new


restaurant, which was being redecorated, was shut up


and the





patron away. It was now night. We had walked


fourteen kilometres over pavement, and we were so


tired that we had to waste one franc-fifty on going


home by Metro. Walking was agony to Boris with his game


leg,


  and his optimism wore thinner and thinner as the day


went on. When he got out of the Metro at the Place


d'Italie he was in despair. He began to say that it was


no use looking for work-there was nothing for it but to


try crime.



   "Sooner rob than starve,





mon ami. I have often


planned it. A fat, rich American-some dark corner


down Montparnasse way-a cobblestone in a stocking -


bang! And then go through his pockets and bolt. It is


feasible, do you not think? I would not flinch-I have


been a soldier, remember."



   He decided against the plan in the end, because we


were both foreigners and easily recognised.



   When we had got back to my room we spent another


one franc-fifty on bread and chocolate. Boris devoured


his share, and at once cheered up like magic; food


seemed to act on his system as rapidly as a cocktail. He


took out a pencil and began making a list of the people


who would probably give us jobs. There were dozens


of them, he said.



   "To-morrow we shall find something,





mon ami, I


know it in my bones. The luck always changes. Besides,


we both have brains-a man with brains can't starve.



   "What things a man can do with brains! Brains will =-


make money out of anything. I had a friend once, a


Pole, a real man of genius; and what do you think he


used to do? He would buy a gold ring and pawn it for


fifteen francs. Then-you know how carelessly the clerks


fill up the tickets-where the clerk had written ' en or' he


would add '





et diamants' and he would change 'fifteen


francs' to 'fifteen thousand.' Neat, eh? Then, you see,


he could borrow a thousand francs on the security of the


ticket. That is what I mean by brains . . ."



   For the rest of the evening Boris was in a hopeful


mood, talking of the times we should have together


when we were waiters together at Nice or Biarritz, with


smart rooms and enough money to set up mistresses. He


was too tired to walk the three kilometres back to his


hotel, and slept the night on the floor of my room, with


his coat rolled round his shoes for a pillow.





                         VI



WE again failed to find work the next day, and it was


three weeks before the luck changed. My two hundred


francs saved me from trouble about the rent, but


everything else went as badly as possible. Day after day


Boris and I went up and down Paris, drifting at two


miles an hour through the crowds, bored and hungry,


and finding nothing. One day, I remember, we crossed


the Seine eleven times. We loitered for hours outside


service doorways, and when the manager came out we


would go up to him ingratiatingly, cap in hand. We


always got the same answer: they did not want a lame


man, nor a man without experience. Once we were very


nearly engaged. While we spoke to the manager Boris


stood straight upright, not supporting himself with his


stick, and the manager did not see that he was lame.


"Yes," he said, "we want two men in the cellars.


Perhaps you would do. Come inside." Then Boris


moved, the game was up. « Ah, » said the manager,


"you limp.





Malheureusement---


 "



   We enrolled our names at agencies and answered


advertisements,_ but walking everywhere made us


slow, and we seemed to miss every job by half an


hour. Once we very nearly got a job swabbing out


railway trucks, but at the last moment they rejected us


in favour of Frenchmen. Once we answered an


advertisement calling for hands at a circus. You had to


shift benches and clean up litter, and, during the


performance, stand on two tubs and let a lion jump


through your legs. When we got to the place, an hour


before the time named, we found a queue of fifty men


already waiting. There is some attraction in lions,


evidently.



   Once an agency to which I had applied months


earlier sent me a





petit bleu, telling me of an Italian


gentleman who wanted English lessons. The





petit bleu 


said "Come at once" and promised twenty francs an


hour. Boris and I were in despair. Here was a splendid


chance, and I could not take it, for it was impossible to


go to the agency with my coat out at the elbow. Then it


occurred to us that I could wear Boris's coat-it did did


not match my trousers, but the trousers were grey and


might pass for flannel at a short distance. The coat was


so much too big for me that I had to wear it unbuttoned


and keep one hand in my pocket. I hurried out, and


wasted seventy-five centimes on a bus fare to get to the


agency. When I got there I found that the Italian had


changed his mind and left Paris.



   Once Boris suggested that I should go to Les Halles


and try for a job as a porter. I arrived at half-past four


the morning, when the work was getting into its swing.


Seeing a short, fat man in a bowler hat directing some


porters, I went up to him and asked for work.


Before answering he seized my right hand and felt the palm.



   "You are strong, eh?" he said.



   "Very strong," I said untruly.



   "





Bien. Let me see you lift that crate."



   It was a huge wicker basket full of potatoes. I took


hold of it, and found that, so far from lifting it, I could


not even move it. The man in the bowler hat watched


me, then shrugged his shoulders and turned away. I


made off When I had gone some distance I looked


back and saw





four men lifting the basket on to a cart.


It weighed three hundredweight, possibly. The man


had seen that I was no use, and taken this way of


getting rid of me.



   Sometimes in his hopeful moments Boris spent


fifty centimes on a stamp and wrote to one of his ex-


mistresses, asking for money. Only one of them ever


replied. It was a woman who, besides having been


his mistress, owed him two hundred francs. When


Boris saw the letter waiting and recognised the


handwriting, he was wild with hope. We seized the


letter and rushed up to Boris's room to read it, like a


child with stolen sweets. Boris read the letter, then


handed it silently to me. It ran:



MY LITTLE CHERISHED WOOLF,-- With what delight did I


open thy charming letter, reminding me of the days of our


perfect love, and of the so dear kisses which I have received


from thy lips. Such memories linger for ever in the heart, like


the perfume of a flower that is dead.


"As to thy request for two hundred francs, alas! it is


impossible. Thou dost not know, my dear one, how I am


desolated to hear of thy embarrassments. But what wouldst


thou? In this life which is so sad, trouble comes to everyone. I


too have had my share. My little sister has been ill (ah, the


poor little one, how she suffered!) and we are obliged to pay I


know not what to the doctor. All our money is gone and we


are passing, I assure thee, very difficult days.


"Courage, my little wolf, always the courage! Remember that


the bad days are not for ever, and the trouble which seems so


terrible will disappear at last.


"Rest assured, my dear one, that I will remember thee always.


And receive the most sincere embraces of her who has never


ceased to love thee, thy




                        "YVONNE."




   This letter disappointed Boris so much that he went


straight to bed and would not look for work again that


day.



   My sixty francs lasted about a fortnight. I had


given up the pretence of going out to restaurants, and


we used to eat in my room, one of us sitting on the


bed and the other on the chair. Boris would contribute


his two francs and I three or four francs, and we


would buy bread, potatoes, milk and cheese, and make


soup over my spirit lamp. We had a saucepan and a


coffee-bowl and one spoon; every day there was a


polite squabble as to who should eat out of the


saucepan and who out of the coffee-bowl (the


saucepan held more), and every day, to my secret


anger, Boris gave in first and had the saucepan.


Sometimes we had more bread in the evening,


sometimes not. Our linen was getting filthy, and it


was three weeks since I had had a bath; Boris, so he


said, had not had a bath for months. It was tobacco


that made everything tolerable. We had plenty of


tobacco, for some time before Boris had met a soldier


(the soldiers are given their tobacco free) and bought


twenty or thirty packets at fifty centimes each.



   All this was far worse for Boris than for me. The


walking and sleeping on the floor kept his leg and


back in constant pain, and with his vast Russian


appetite he suffered torments of hunger, though he


never seemed to grow thinner. On the whole he was


surprisingly gay, and he had vast capacities for hope.


He used to say seriously that he had a patron saint who


watched over him, and when things were very bad he would


search the gutter for money, saying that the saint often


dropped a two-franc piece there. One day we were waiting


in the Rue Royale; there was a Russian retaurant near by,


and we were going to ask for a job there. Suddenly, Boris


made up his mind to go into the Madeleine and burn a


fifty-centime candle to his patron saint. Then, coming


out, he said that he would be on the safe side, and


solemnly put a match to a fifty-centime stamp, as a


sacrifice to the immortal gods. Perhaps the gods and the


saints did not get on together; at any rate, we missed the


job.



   On some mornings Boris collapsed in the most utter


despair. He would lie in bed almost weeping, cursing the


Jew with whom he lived. Of late the Jew had become


restive about paying the daily two francs, and, what was


worse, had begun putting on intolerable airs of


patronage. Boris said that I, as an Englishman, could not


conceive what torture it was to a Russian of family to be


at the mercy of a Jew.



   "A Jew,





mon ami, a veritable Jew! And he hasn't even


the decency to be ashamed of it. To think that I, a


captain in the Russian Army-have I ever told you, mon


ami, that I was a captain in the Second Siberian Rifles?


Yes, a captain, and my father was a colonel. And here I


am, eating the bread of a Jew. A Jew ...



   "I will tell you what Jews are like. Once, in the early


months of the war, we were on the march, and we had


halted at a village for the night. A horrible old Jew, with


a red beard like Judas Iscariot, came sneaking up to my


billet. I asked him what he wanted. 'Your honour,' he


said, 'I have brought a girl for you, a beautiful young


girl only seventeen. It will only be fifty francs.' 'Thank


you,' I said, 'you can take her away again. I don't want


to catch any diseases.' 'Diseases!'


cried the Jew, mais,





 monsieur le capitaine, there's no fear


of that. It's my own daughter!' That is the Jewish


national character for you.



   "Have I ever told you,





mon ami, that in the old Russian


Army,it was considered bad form to spit on a Jew? Yes,


we thought a Russian officer's spittle was too precious to


be wasted on Jews . . ." etc. etc.



   On these days Boris usually declared himself too ill to


go out and look for work. He would lie till evening in the


greyish, verminous sheets, smoking and reading old


newspapers. Sometimes we played chess. We had no


board, but we wrote down the moves on a piece of paper,


and afterwards we made a board from the side of a


packing-case, and a set of men from buttons, Belgian


coins and the like. Boris, like many Russians, had a


passion for chess. It was a saying of his that the rules of


chess are the same as the rules of love and war, and that


if you can win at one you can win at the others. But he


also said that if you have a chessboard you do not mind


being hungry, which was certainly not true in my case.





                   VII



MY MONEY oozed away-to eight francs, to four


francs, to one franc, to twenty-five centimes; and twenty-


five centimes is useless, for it will buy nothing except a


newspaper. We went several days on dry bread, and then


I was two and a half days with nothing to eat whatever.


This was an ugly experience. There are people who do


fasting cures of three weeks or more, and they say that


fasting is quite pleasant after the fourth day; I do not


know, never having gone beyond the third day. Probably


it seems different when one is doing it voluntarily and is


not underfed at the start.



   The first day, too inert to look for work, I borrowed a


rod and went fishing in the Seine, baiting with blue-


bottles. I hoped to catch enough for a meal, but of course


I did not. The Seine is full of dace, but they grew cunning


during the seige of Paris, and none of


  them has been


caught since, except in nets. On the second day I thought


of pawning my overcoat, but it seemed too far to walk to


the pawnshop, and I spent the day in bed, reading the





Memoirs of Sherlock Holmes


. It was all that I felt equal to,


without food. Hunger reduces one to an utterly spineless,


brainless condition, more like the after-effects of


influenza than anything else. It is as though one had been


turned into a jellyfish, or as though all one's blood had


been pumped out and luke-warm water substituted.


Complete inertia is my chief memory of hunger; that, and


being obliged to spit very frequently, and the spittle


being curiously white and flocculent, like cuckoo-spit. I


do not know the reason for this, but everyone who has


gone hungry several days has noticed it.



   On the third morning I felt very much better. I


realised that I must do something at once, and I decided


to go and ask Boris to let me share his two francs, at


any rate for a day or two. When I arrived I found Boris


in bed, and furiously angry. As soon as I came in he


burst out, almost choking:



   "He has taken it back, the dirty thief! He has taken it


back!"



   "Who's taken what?" I said.



   "The Jew! Taken my two francs, the dog, the thief! He


robbed me in my sleep!"



   It appeared that on the previous night the Jew had


flatly refused to pay the daily two francs. They had


argued and argued, and at last the Jew had consented to


hand over the money; he had done it, Boris said, in


the most offensive manner, making a little speech


about how kind he was, and extorting abject gratitude.


And then in the morning he had stolen the money back


before Boris was awake.



   This was a blow. I was horribly disappointed, for I


had allowed my belly to expect food, a great mistake


when one is hungry. However, rather to my surprise,


Boris was far from despairing. He sat up in bed,


lighted his pipe and reviewed the situation.



   "Now listen,





mon-ami, this is a tight corner. We have


only twenty-five centimes between us, and I don't


suppose the Jew will ever pay my two francs again. In


any case his behaviour is becoming intolerable. Will


you believe it, the other night he had the indecency to


bring a woman in here, while I was there on the floor.


The low animal! And I have a worse thing to tell you.


The Jew intends clearing out of here. He owes a week's


rent, and his idea is to avoid paying that and give me the


slip at the same time. If the Jew shoots the moon I shall


be left without a roof, and the





patron will will take my


suitcase in lieu of rent, curse him! We have got to make


a vigorous move."



   "All right. But what can we do? It seems to me that


the only thing is to pawn our overcoats and get some


food."



   "We'll do that, of course, but I must get my posses-


sions out of this house first. To think of my photographs


being seized! Well, my plan is ready. I'm going to


forestall the Jew and shoot the moon myself. F-----





le 





camp


-retreat, you understand. I think that is the correct


move, eh?"



   "But, my dear Boris, how can you, in daytime? You're


bound to be caught."



   « Ah well, it will need strategy, of course. Our





patron 


is on the watch for people slipping out without paying


their rent; he's been had that way before. He and his


wife take it in turns all day to sit in the office-what


misers, these Frenchmen! But I have thought of a way


to do it, if you will help."



   I did not feel in a very helpful mood, but I asked


Boris what his plan was. He explained it carefully.



   "Now listen. We must start by pawning our overcoats.


First go back to your room and fetch your overcoat, then


come back here and fetch mine, and smuggle it out under


cover of yours. Take them to the pawnshop in the Rue


des Francs Bourgeois. You ought to get twenty francs


for the two, with luck. Then go down to the Seine bank


and fill your pockets with stones, and bring them back


and put them in my suitcase. You see the idea? I shall


wrap as many of my things as I can carry in a


newspaper, and go down and ask the patron the way to


the nearest laundry. I shall be very brazen and casual,


you understand, and of course the patron will think the


bundle is nothing but dirty linen. Or, if he does suspect


anything, he will do what he always does, the mean


sneak; he will go up to my room and feel the weight of


my suitcase. And when he feels the weight of stones he


will think it is still full. Strategy, eh? Then afterwards I


can come back and carry my other things out in my


pockets."



   "But what about the suitcase?"



   "Oh, that? We shall have to abandon it. The miser-


able thing only cost about twenty francs. Besides, one


always abandons something in a retreat. Look at


Napoleon at the Beresina! He abandoned his whole


army."



   Boris was so pleased with this scheme (he called it





une 





ruse de guerre


) that he almost forgot being hungry. Its


main weakness-that he would have nowhere to sleep


after shooting the moon-he ignored.



   At first the





ruse de guerre worked well. I went home


and fetched my overcoat (that made already nine kilo-


metres, on an empty belly) and smuggled Boris's coat


out successfully. Then a hitch occured. The receiver at


the pawnshop, a nasty, sour-faced interfering, little


man-a typical French official-refused the coats on the


ground that they were not wrapped up in anything. He


said that they must be put either in a valise or a


carboard box. This spoiled everything, for we had no


box of any kind, and with only twenty-five centimes


between us we could not buy one.



   I went back and told Boris the bad news. "





Merde!" he


said, "that makes it awkward. Well, no matter, there is


always a way. We'll put the overcoats in my suitcase."



   "But how are we to get the suitcase past the





patron?


He's sitting almost in the door of the office. It's


impossible!"



   "How easily you despair,





mon ami! Where is that


English obstinacy that I have read of? Courage! We'll


manage it."



   Boris thought for a little while, and then produced


another cunning plan. The essential difficulty was to


hold the





patron's attention for perhaps five seconds,


while we could slip past with the suitcase. But, as it


happened, the





patron had just one weak spot-that he was


interested in





Le Sport, and was ready to talk if you


approached him on this subject. Boris read an article


about bicycle races in an old copy of the





Petit Parisien,


and then, when he had reconnoitred the stairs, went


down and managed to set the





patron talking. Meanwhile,


I waited at the foot of the stairs, with the overcoats


under one arm and the suitcase under the other. Boris


was to give a cough when he thought the moment


favourable. I waited trembling, for at any moment the






patron's


 wife might come out of the door opposite the


office, and then the game was up. However, presently


Boris coughed. I sneaked rapidly past the office and out


into the street, rejoicing that my shoes did not creak. The


plan might have failed if Boris had been thinner, for his


big shoulders blocked the doorway of the office. His nerve


was splendid, too; he went on laughing and talking in the


most casual way, and so loud that he quite covered any


noise I made. When I was well away he came and joined


me round the corner, and we bolted.



   And then, after all our trouble, the receiver at the


pawnshop again refused the overcoats. He told me (one


could see his French soul revelling in the pedantry of it)


that I had not sufficient papers of identification; my





carte





d'identit&#233;


 was not enough, and I must show a passport or


addressed envelopes. Boris had addressed envelopes by


the score, but his





carte d'identit&#233; was out of order (he


never renewed it, so as to avoid the tax), so we could not


pawn the overcoats in his name. All we could do was to


trudge up to my room, get the necessary papers, and


take the coats to the pawnshop in the Boulevard Port


Royal.



   I left Boris at my room and went down to the pawn-


shop. When I got there I found that it was shut and


would not open till four in the afternoon. It was now


about half-past one, and I had walked twelve kilometres


and had no food for sixty hours. Fate seemed to be


playing a series of extraordinarily unamusing jokes.



   Then the luck changed as though by a miracle. I was


walking home through the Rue Broca when suddenly,


glittering on the cobbles, I saw a five-sou piece. I


pounced on it, hurried home, got our other five-sou piece


and bought a pound of potatoes. There was only enough


alcohol in the stove to parboil them, and we


had no salt, but we wolfed them, skins and all. After


that we felt like new men, and sat playing chess till the


pawnshop opened.



   At four o'clock I went back to the pawnshop. I was


not hopeful, for if I had only got seventy francs before,


what could I expect for two shabby overcoats in a


cardboard suitcase? Boris had said twenty francs, but I


thought it would be ten francs, or even five. Worse yet, I


might be refused altogether, like poor





Num&#233;ro 83 on the


previous occasion. I sat on the front bench, so as not to


see people laughing when the clerk said five francs.



   At last the clerk called my number: «





Num&#233;ro 117 !"



   "Yes," I said, standing up.



   "Fifty francs?"



   It was almost as great a shock as the seventy francs


had been the time before. I believe now that the clerk


had mixed my number up with someone else's, for one


could not have sold the coats outright for fifty francs. I


hurried home and walked into my room with my hands


behind my back, saying nothing. Boris was playing with


the chessboard. He looked up eagerly.



   "What did you get?" he exclaimed. "What, not twenty


francs? Surely you got ten francs, anyway?





Nom de Dieu,


five francs-that is a bit too thick.





Mon ami, don't say it


was five francs. If you say it was five francs I shall really


begin to think of suicide."



   I threw the fifty-franc note on to the table. Boris


turned white as chalk, and then, springing up, seized my


hand and gave it a grip that almost broke the bones. We


ran out, bought bread and wine, a piece of meat and


alcohol for the stove, and gorged.



   After eating, Boris became more optimistic than I had


ever known him. "What did I tell you?" he said. "The


fortune of war! This morning with five sous, and


now look at us. I have always said it, there is nothing


easier to get than money. And that reminds me, I have a


friend in the Rue Fondary whom we might go and see.


He has cheated me of four thousand francs, the thief. He


is the greatest thief alive when he is sober, but it is a


curious thing, he is quite honest when he is drunk. I


should think he would be drunk by six in the evening.


Let's go and find him. Very likely he will pay up a


hundred on account.





Merde! He might pay two hundred.





Allons y!"




   We went to the Rue Fondary and found the man, and


he was drunk, but we did not get our hundred francs. As


soon as he and Boris met there was a terrible altercation


on the pavement. The other man declared that he did not


owe Boris a penny, but that on the contrary Boris owed





him


 four thousand francs, and both of them kept


appealing to me for my opinion. I never understood the


rights of the matter. The two argued and argued, first in


the street, then in a bistro, then in a





prix fixe restaurant


where we went for dinner, then in another





bistro.


Finally, having called one another thieves for two hours,


they went off together on a drinking bout that finished


up the last sou of Boris's money.



   Boris slept the night at the house of a cobbler,


another Russian refugee, in the Commerce quarter.


Meanwhile, I had eight francs left, and plenty of


cigarettes, and was stuffed to the eyes with food and


drink. It was a marvellous change for the better after two


bad days.




                       VIII



WE had now twenty-eight francs in hand, and could


start looking for work once more. Boris was still


sleeping, on some mysterious terms, at the house of the


cobbler, and he had managed to borrow another twenty


francs from a Russian friend. He had friends, mostly


exofficers like himself, here and there all over Paris.


Some were waiters or dishwashers, some drove taxis, a


few lived on women, some had managed to bring


money away from Russia and owned garages or


dancing-halls. In general, the Russian refugees in Paris


are hard-working people, and have put up with their


bad luck far better than one can imagine Englishmen


of the same class doing. There are exceptions, of


course. Boris told me of an exiled Russian duke whom


he had once met, who frequented expensive


restaurants. The duke would find out if there was a


Russian officer among the waiters, and, after he had


dined, call him in a friendly way to his table.



   « Ah, » the duke would say,


  "so you are an old


soldier, like myself? These are bad days, eh? Well, well,


the Russian soldier fears nothing. And what was your


regiment?"



   "The so-and-so, sir," the waiter would answer.



   "A very gallant regiment! I inspected them in 1912.


By the way, I have unfortunately left my notecase at


home. A Russian officer will, I know, oblige me with


three hundred francs."



   If the waiter had three hundred francs he would hand


it over, and, of course, never see it again. The duke


made quite a lot in this way. Probably the waiters did


not mind being swindled. A duke is a duke, even in


exile.



   It was through one of these Russian refugees that


Boris heard of something which seemed to promise


money. Two days after we had pawned the overcoats,


Boris said to me rather mysteriously:



   "Tell me,





mon ami, have you any political opinions?"



   "No," I said.



   " Neither have I. Of course, one is always a patriot;


but still--- Did not Moses say something about spoiling


the Egyptians? As an Englishman you will have read


the Bible. What I mean is, would you object to earning


money from Communists?"



   "No, of course not."



   "Well, it appears that there is a Russian secret


society in Paris who might do something for us. They


are Communists; in fact they are agents for the Bol-


sheviks. They act as a friendly society, get in touch


with exiled Russians, and try to get them to turn


Bolshevik. My friend has joined their society, and he


thinks they would help us if we went to them."



   "But what can they do for us? In any case they


won't help me, as I'm not a Russian."



   "That is just the point. It seems that they are corre-


spondents for a Moscow paper, and they want some


articles on English politics. If we go to them at once


they may commission you to write the articles."



   "Me? But I don't know anything about politics."



   «





Merde! Neither do they. Who does know anything


about politics? It's easy. All you have to do is to copy it


out of the English papers. Isn't there a Paris





Daily Mail?


Copy it from that."



   "But the





Daily Mail is a Conservative paper. They


loathe the Communists."



   "Well, say the opposite of what the





Daily Mail says,


then you





can't be wrong. We mustn't throw this chance


away,





mon ami. It might mean hundreds of francs"



   I did not like the idea, for the Paris police are very


hard on Communists, especially if they are foreigners,


and I was already under suspicion. Some months


before, a detective had seen me come out of the office


of a Communist weekly paper, and I had had a great


deal of trouble with the police. If they caught me going


to this secret society, it might mean deportation. However,


the chance seemed too good to be missed. That after-


noon Boris's friend, another waiter, came to take us to


the rendezvous. I cannot remember the name of the


street-it was a shabby street running south from the


Seine bank, somewhere near the Chamber of Deputies.


Boris's friend insisted on great caution. We loitered


casually down the street, marked the doorway we were


to enter-it was a laundry-and then strolled back again,


keeping an eye on all the windows and caf&#233;s. If the


place were known as a haunt of Communists it was


probably watched, and we intended to go home if we


saw anyone at all like a detective. I was frightened, but


Boris enjoyed these conspiratorial proceedings, and


quite forgot that he was about to trade with the slayers


of his parents.


   .



   When we were certain that the coast was clear we


dived quickly into the doorway. In the laundry was a


Frenchwoman ironing clothes, who told us that "the


Russian gentlemen" lived up a staircase across the


courtyard. We went up several flights of dark stairs


and emerged on to a landing. A strong, surly-looking


young man, with hair growing low on his head, was


standing at the top of the stairs. As I came up he


looked at me suspiciously, barred the way with his


arm and said something in Russian.



   "





Mot d'ordre! » he said sharply when I did not


answer.



   I stopped, startled. I had not expected passwords.


"





Mot d'ordre! » repeated the Russian.



   Boris's friend, who was walking behind, now came


forward and said something in Russian, either the pass


word or an explanation. At this, the surly young man


seemed satisfied, and led us into a small, shabby room


with frosted windows. It was like a very poverty-


stricken office, with propaganda posters in Russian


lettering and a huge, crude picture of Lenin tacked on


the walls. At the table sat an unshaven Russian in shirt


sleeves, addressing newspaper wrappers from a pile in


front of him. As I came in he spoke to me in French,


with a bad accent.



   "This is very careless!" he exclaimed fussily. "Why


have you come here without a parcel of washing?"



   "Washing?"



   "Everybody who comes here brings washing. It looks


as though they were going to the laundry downstairs.


Bring a good, large bundle next time. We don't want the


police on our tracks."



   This was even more conspiratorial than I had ex-


pected. Boris sat down in the only vacant chair, and


there was a great deal of talking in Russian. Only the


unshaven man talked; the surly one leaned against the


wall with his eyes on me, as though he still suspected


me. It was queer, standing in the little secret room with


its revolutionary posters, listening to a conversation


which I did not understand a word. The Russians of


talked quickly and eagerly, with smiles and shrugs of the


shoulders. I wondered what it was all about. They would


be calling each other "little father," I thought, and "little


dove," and « Ivan &#192;lexandrovitch," like the characters in


Russian novels. And the talk would be of revolutions.


The unshaven man would be saying firmly, "We never


argue. Controversy is a bourgeois pastime. Deeds are our


arguments." Then I gathered that it was not this exactly.


Twenty francs was being demanded, for an entrance fee


apparently, and Boris was promising to pay it (we had


just seventeen francs in the world). Finally Boris


produced our precious store of money and paid five


francs on account.



   At this the surly man looked less suspicious, and sat


down on the edge of the table. The unshaven one began


to question me in French, making notes on a slip of


paper. Was I a Communist? he asked. By sympathy, I


answered; I had never joined any organisation. Did I


understand the political situation in England? Oh, of


course, of course. I mentioned the names of various


Ministers, and made some contemptuous remarks about


the Labour Party. And what about





Le Sport? Could I do


articles on





Le Sport? (Football and Socialism have some


mysterious connection on the Continent.) Oh, of


course, again. Both men nodded gravely. The unshaven


one said:



   "





Evidemment, you have a thorough knowledge of


conditions in England. Could you undertake to write a


series of articles for a Moscow weekly paper? We will


give you the particulars."



   "Certainly."



   "Then, comrade, you will hear from us by the first


post to-morrow. Or possibly the second post. Our rate of


pay is a hundred and fifty francs an article. Remember to


bring a parcel of washing next time you come. Au


revoir, comrade."



   We went downstairs, looked carefully out of the


laundry to see if there was anyone in the street, and


slipped out. Boris was wild with joy. In a sort of sacri-


ficial ecstasy he rushed into the nearest tobacconist's


and spent fifty centimes on a cigar. He came out thump-


ing his stick on the pavement and beaming.



   "At last! At last! Now,





mon ami, our fortune really


is made. You took them in finely. Did you hear him


call you comrade? A hundred and fifty francs an


article-





nom de Dieu, what luck!"



   Next morning when I heard the postman I rushed


down to the bistro for my letter; to my disappointment,


it had not come. I stayed at home for the second post;


still no letter. When three days had gone by and I had 4



not heard from the secret society, we gave up hope,


deciding that they must have found somebody else to do


their articles.



   Ten days later we made another visit to the office of


the secret society, taking care to bring a parcel that


looked like washing. And the secret society had van-


ished! The woman in the laundry knew nothing-she


simply said that «





ces messieurs" had left some days


ago, after trouble about the rent. What fools we looked,


standing there with our parcel! But it was a consolation


that we had paid only five francs instead of twenty.



   And that was the last we ever heard of the secret


society. Who or what they really were, nobody knew.


Personally I do not think they had anything to do with


the Communist Party; I think they were simply


swindlers, who preyed upon Russian refugees by ex-


tracting entrance fees to an imaginary society. It was


quite safe, and no doubt they are still doing it in some


other city. They were clever fellows, and played their


part admirably. Their office looked exactly as a secret


Communist office should look, and as for that touch


about bringing a parcel of washing, it was genius.




                       IX



FOR three more days we continued traipsing about


looking for work, coming home for diminishing meals


of soup and bread in my bedroom. There were now two


gleams of hope. In the first place, Boris had heard of a


possible job at the H&#244;tel X., near the Place de la


Concorde, and in the second, the





patron of the new


restaurant in the Rue du Commerce had at last come


back. We went down in the afternoon and saw him. On


the way Boris talked of the vast fortunes we should


make if we got this job, and on the importance of


making a good impression on the





patron.



   "Appearance-appearance is everything, mon ami. Give


me a new suit


  and I will borrow a thousand francs by


dinner-time. What a pity I did not buy a collar


when we had money. I turned my collar inside out this


morning; but what is the use, one side is as dirty as the


other. Do you think I look hungry, mon ami? »



   "You look pale."



   "Curse it, what can one do on bread and potatoes?


It is fatal to look hungry. It makes people want to kick


you. Wait."



   He stopped at a jeweller's window and smacked his


cheeks sharply to bring the blood into them. Then, before


the flush had faded, we hurried into the restaurant and


introduced ourselves to the





patron.



   The





patron was a short, fattish, very dignified man


with wavy grey hair, dressed in a smart, doublebreasted


flannel suit and smelling of scent. Boris told me that he


too was an ex-colonel of the Russian Army. His wife was


there too, a horrid, fat Frenchwoman with a dead-white


face and scarlet lips, reminding me of cold veal and


tomatoes. The patron greeted Boris genially, and they


talked together in Russian for a few minutes. I stood in the


background, preparing to tell some big lies about my


experience as a dishwasher.



   Then the





patron came over towards me. I shuffled


uneasily, trying to look servile. Boris had rubbed it into


me that a





plongeur is a slave's slave, and I expected the


patron to treat me like dirt. To my astonishment, he seized


me warmly by the hand.



   "So you are an Englishman!" he exclaimed. "But how


charming! I need not ask, then, whether you are a golfer?"



   «





Mais certainement, » I said, seeing that this was ex-


pected of me.



   "All my life I have wanted to play golf. Will you, my


dear





monsieur, be so kind as to show me a few of the


principal strokes?"



   Apparently this was the Russian way of doing busi-


ness. The patron listened attentively while I explained the


difference between a driver and an iron, and then


suddenly informed me that it was all entendu; Boris was


to be





maitre d'h&#244;tel when the restaurant opened, and I





plongeur


, with a chance of rising to lavatory attendant if


trade was good. When would the restaurant open? I


asked. "Exactly a fortnight from to-day," the patron


answered grandly (he had a manner of waving his hand


and flicking off his cigarette ash at the same time, which


looked very grand), "exactly a fortnight from to-day, in


time for lunch." Then, with obvious pride, he showed us


over the restaurant.



   It was a smallish place, consisting of a bar, a dining-


room, and a kitchen no bigger than the average bath-


room. The





patron was decorating it in a trumpery


"picturesque" style (he called it «





le Normand »; it was a


matter of sham beams stuck on the plaster, and the like)


and proposed to call it the Auberge de Jehan Cottard, to


give a medieval effect. He had a leaflet printed, full of lies


about the historical associations of the quarter, and this


leaflet actually claimed, among other things, that there


had once been an inn on the site of the restaurant which


was frequented by Charlemagne. The





patron was very


pleased with this touch. He was also having the bar


decorated with indecent pictures by an artist from the


Salon. Finally he gave us each an expensive cigarette,


and after some more talk he went home.



   I felt strongly that we should never get any good


from this restaurant. The





patron had looked to me like a


cheat, and, what was worse, an incompetent cheat, and I


had seen two unmistakable duns hanging about the back


door. But Boris, seeing himself a





maitre d'h&#244;tel once more,


would not be discouraged.



   "We've brought it off-only a fortnight to hold out. What


is a fortnight? Food?





Je m'en f--- . To think that


in only three weeks I shall have my mistress! Will she be


dark or fair, I wonder? I don't mind, so long as she is not


too thin."



   Two bad days followed. We had only sixty centimes left,


and we spent it on half a pound of bread, with a piece of


garlic to rub it with. The point of rubbing garlic on bread is


that the taste lingers and gives one the illusion of having


fed recently. We sat most of that day in the Jardin des


Plantes. Boris had shots with stones at the tame pigeons,


but always missed them, and after that we wrote dinner


menus on the backs of envelopes. We were too hungry even


to try and think of anything except food. I remember the


dinner Boris finally selected for himself. It was: a dozen


oysters, bortch soup (the red, sweet, beetroot soup with


cream on top), crayfishes, a young chicken en casserole, beef


with stewed plums, new potatoes, a salad, suet pudding


and Roquefort cheese, with a litre of Burgundy and some


old brandy. Boris had international tastes in food. Later


on, when we were prosperous, I occasionally saw him eat


meals almost as large without difficulty.



   When our money came to an end I stopped looking for


work, and was another day without food. I did not believe


that the Auberge de Jehan Cottard was really going to


open, and I could see no other prospect, but I was too lazy


to do anything but lie in bed. Then the luck changed


abruptly. At night, at about ten o'clock,


I heard an eager shout from the street. I got up and


went to the window. Boris was there, waving his stick


and beaming. Before speaking he dragged a bent loaf


from his pocket and threw it up to me.



   «





Mon ami, mon cher ami, we're saved! What do you


think?"



   "Surely you haven't got a job!"



   "At the H&#244;tel X., near the Place de la Concorde--five


hundred francs a month, and food. I have been working


there to-day. Name of Jesus Christ, how I have eaten!"



   After ten or twelve hours' work, and with his game


leg, his first thought had been to walk three kilometres


to my hotel and tell me the good news! What was more,


he told me to meet him in the Tuileries the next day


during his afternoon interval, in case he should be able


to steal some food for me. At the appointed time I met


Boris on a public bench. He undid his waistcoat and


produced a large, crushed, newspaper packet; in it were


some minced veal, a wedge of Camembert cheese,


bread and an &#233;clair, all jumbled together.



   "





Voila!" said Boris, "that's all I could smuggle out


for you. The doorkeeper is a cunning swine."



   It is disagreeable to eat out of a newspaper on a


public seat, especially in the Tuileries, which are


generally full of pretty girls, but I was too hungry to


care. While I ate, Boris explained that he was working in


the cafeterie of the hotel-that is, in English, the


stillroom. It appeared that the cafeterie was the very


lowest post in the hotel, and a dreadful come-down for


a waiter, but it would do until the Auberge de Jehan


Cottard opened. Meanwhile I was to meet Boris every


day in the Tuileries, and he would smuggle out as much


food as he dared. For three days we continued with


this arrangement, and I lived entirely on the stolen


food. Then all our troubles came to an end, for one of


the plongeurs left the H&#244;tel X., and on Boris's recom-


mendation I was given a job there myself.




                      X



THE H&#244;tel X. was a vast, grandiose place with a classical


fa&#231;ade, and at one side a little, dark doorway like a rat-


hole, which was the service entrance. I arrived at a


quarter to seven in the morning. A stream of men with


greasy trousers were hurrying in and being checked by a


doorkeeper who sat in a tiny office. I waited, and


presently the





chef du personnel, a sort of assistant manager,


arrived and began to question me. He was an Italian,


with a round, pale face, haggard from overwork. He


asked whether I was an experienced dishwasher, and I


said that I was; he glanced at my hands and saw that I


was lying, but on hearing that I was an Englishman he


changed his tone and engaged me.



   "We have been looking for someone to practise our


English on," he said. "Our clients are all Americans, and


the only English we know is ---" He repeated something


that little boys write on the walls in London. "You may




be useful. Come downstairs."



   He led me down a winding staircase into a narrow


passage, deep underground, and so low that I had to


stoop in places. It was stiflingly hot and very dark, with


only dim, yellow bulbs several yards apart. There seemed


to be miles of dark labyrinthine passages actually, I


suppose, a few hundred yards in all-that reminded one


queerly of the lower decks of a liner; there were the same


heat and cramped space and warm reek of food, and a humming,


whirring noise (it came from the kitchen furnaces) just like


the whir of engines.


We passed doorways which let out sometimes a shouting


of oaths, sometimes the red glare of a fire, once a


shuddering draught from an ice chamber. As we went


along, something struck me violently in the back. It was


a hundred-pound block of ice, carried by a blueaproned


porter. After him came a boy with a great slab of veal on


his shoulder, his cheek pressed into the damp, spongy


flesh. They shoved me aside with a cry of «





Sauve-toi,





idiot


!" and rushed on. On the wall, under one of the


lights, someone had written in a very neat hand: "Sooner


will you find a cloudless sky in winter, than a woman at


the H&#244;tel X. who has her maidenhead." It seemed a


queer sort of place:



   One of the passages branched off into a laundry,


where an old, skull-faced woman gave me a blue apron


and a pile of dishcloths. Then the





chef du personnel took


me to a tiny underground den-a cellar below a cellar, as


it were-where there were a sink and some gas-ovens. It


was too low for me to stand quite upright, and the


temperature was perhaps 11o degrees Fahrenheit. The





chef du personnel 


explained that my job was to fetch meals


for the higher hotel employees, who fed in a small


dining-room above, clean their room and wash their


crockery. When he had gone, a waiter, another Italian,


thrust a fierce, fuzzy head into the doorway and looked


down at me.



   "English, eh?" he said. "Well, I'm in charge here. If


you work well"-he made the motion of up-ending a


bottle and sucked noisily. "If you don't"-he gave the


doorpost several vigorous kicks. "To me, twisting your


neck would be no more than spitting on the floor. And if


there's any trouble, they'll believe me, not you. So be


careful."



   After this I set to work rather hurriedly. Except for


about an hour, I was at work from seven in the morning


till a quarter past nine at night; first at washing


crockery, then at scrubbing the tables and floors of the


employees' dining-room, then at polishing glasses and


knives, then at fetching meals, then at washing crockery


again, then at fetching more meals and washing more


crockery. It was easy work, and I got on well with it


except when I went to the kitchen to fetch meals. The


kitchen was like nothing I had ever seen or imagined-a


stifling, low-ceilinged inferno of a cellar, redlit from the


fires, and deafening with oaths and the clanging of pots


and pans. It was so hot that all the metal-work except


the stoves had to be covered with cloth. In the middle


were furnaces, where twelve cooks skipped to and fro,


their faces dripping sweat in spite of their white caps.


Round that were counters where a mob of waiters and


plongeurs clamoured with trays. Scullions, naked to the


waist, were stoking the fires and scouring huge copper


saucepans with sand. Everyone seemed to be in a hurry


and a rage. The head cook, a fine, scarlet man with big


moustachios, stood in the middle booming


continuously, «





&#199;a marche deux ouefs brouill&#233;s!





Ca marche 





un Chateau-briand aux pommes saut&#233;es! 


» except when he


broke off to curse at a plongeur. There were three


counters, and the first time I went to the kitchen I took


my tray unknowingly to the wrong one. The head cook


walked up to me, twisted his moustaches, and looked


me up and down. Then he beckoned to the breakfast


cook and pointed at me.



   "Do you see





that? That is the type of





plongeur they


send us nowadays. Where do you come from, idiot?


From Charenton, I suppose?" (There is a large lunatic


asylum at Charenton.)



   "From England," I said.



   "I might have known it. Well,





mon cher monsieur 





l'Anglais


, may I inform you that you are the son of a


whore? And now the camp to the other counter, where


you belong."



   I got this kind of reception every time I went to the


kitchen, for I always made some mistake; I was ex-


pected to know the work, and was cursed accordingly.


From curiosity I counted the number of times I was


called maquereau during the day, and it was thirty-nine.



   At half-past four the Italian told me that I could stop


working, but that it was not worth going out, as we


began again at five. I went to the lavatory for a smoke;


smoking was strictly forbidden, and Boris had warned


me that the lavatory was the only safe place. After that


I worked again till a quarter-past nine, when the waiter


put his head into the doorway and told me to leave the


rest of the crockery. To my astonishment, after calling


me pig, mackerel, etc., all day, he had suddenly grown


quite friendly. I realised that the curses I had met with


were only a kind of probation.



   "That'll do,





mon p'tit," said the waiter. «





Tu n'es pas 





d&#233;brouillard


, but you work all right. Come up and have


your dinner. The hotel allows us two litres of wine


each, and I've stolen another bottle. We'll have a fine


booze."



   We had an excellent dinner from the leavings of the


higher employees. The waiter, grown mellow, told me


stories about his love-affairs, and about two men whom


he had stabbed in Italy, and about how he had dodged


his military service. He was a good fellow when one


got to know him; he reminded me of Benvenuto


Cellini, somehow. I was tired and drenched with sweat,


but I felt a new man after a day's solid food. The work


did not seem difficult, and I felt that this job would suit


me. It was not certain, however, that it would continue,


for I had been engaged as an "extra" for the day only,


at twenty-five francs. The sour-faced doorkeeper


counted out the money, less fifty centimes which he


said was for insurance (a lie, I discovered afterwards).


Then he stepped out into the passage, made me take off


my coat, and carefully prodded me all over, searching


for stolen food. After this the





chef du personnel appeared


and spoke to me. Like the waiter, he had grown more


genial on seeing that I was willing to work.



   "We will give you a permanent job if you like," he


said. "The head waiter says he would enjoy calling an


Englishman names. Will you sign on for a month?"



   Here was a job at last, and I was ready to jump at it.


Then I remembered the Russian restaurant, due to open


in a fortnight. It seemed hardly fair to promise working a


month, and then leave in the middle. I said that I had


other work in prospect-could I be engaged for a


fortnight? But at that the





chef du personnel shrugged his


shoulders and said that the hotel only engaged men by


the month. Evidently I had lost my chance of a job.



   Boris, by arrangement, was waiting for me in the


Arcade of the Rue de Rivoli. When I told him what had


happened, he was furious. For the first time since I had


known him he forgot his manners and called me a fool.



   "Idiot! Species of idiot! What's the good of my


finding you a job when you go and chuck it up the next


moment? How could you be such a fool as to mention


the other restaurant? You'd only to promise you would


work for a month."



   "It seemed more honest to say I might have to leave,"


I objected.



   "Honest! Honest! Who ever heard of a





plongeur being


honest?





Mon ami"-suddenly he seized my lapel and


spoke very earnestly-"





mon ami, you have worked


here all day. You see what hotel work is like. Do you


think a





plongeur can afford a sense of honour?"



   "No, perhaps not."



   "Well, then, go back quickly and tell the





chef du 





personnel


 you are quite ready to work for a month. Say


you will throw the other job over. Then, when our


restaurant opens, we have only to walk out."



   "But what about my wages if I break my contract?"



   Boris banged his stick on the pavement and cried out


at such stupidity. "Ask to be paid by the day, then you


won't lose a sou. Do you suppose they would prosecute


a





plongeur for breaking his contract? 'A





plongeur is too low


to be prosecuted."



   I hurried back, found the





chef du personnel, and told


him that I would work for a month, whereat he signed


me on. This was my first lesson in





plongeur morality.


Later I realised how foolish it had been to have any


scruples, for the big hotels are quite merciless towards


their employees. They engage or discharge men as the


work demands, and they all sack ten per cent. or more


of their staff when the season is over. Nor have they


any difficulty in replacing a man who leaves at short


notice, for Paris is thronged by hotel employees out of


work.




                          XI



AS it turned out, I did not break my contract, for it


was six weeks before the Auberge de Jehan Cottard


even showed signs of opening. In the meantime I


worked at the H&#244;tel X., four days a week in the cafe-


terie, one day helping the waiter on the fourth floor,


and one day replacing the woman who washed up for


the dining-room. My day off, luckily, was Sunday, but


sometimes another man was ill and I had to work that


day as well. The hours were from seven in the


morning till two in the afternoon, and from five in the


evening till nine-eleven hours; but it was a fourteen-


hour day when I washed up for the dining-room. By the


ordinary standards of a Paris





plongeur, these are


exceptionally short hours. The only hardship of life was


the fearful heat and stuffiness of these labyrinthine


cellars. Apart from this the hotel, which was large and


well organised, was considered a comfortable one.



   Our cafeterie was a murky cellar measuring twenty


feet by seven by eight high, and so crowded with coffee-


urns, breadcutters and the like that one could hardly


move without banging against something. It was lighted


by one dim electric bulb, and four or five gas-fires that


sent out a fierce red breath. There was a thermometer


there, and the temperature never fell below 11o


degrees Fahrenheit-it neared 13o at some times of the


day. At one end were five service lifts, and at the other


an ice cupboard where we stored milk and butter.


When you went into the ice cupboard you dropped a


hundred degrees of temperature at a single step; it


used to remind me of the hymn about Greenland's icy


mountains and India's coral strand. Two men worked


in the cafeterie besides Boris and myself. One was


Mario, a huge, excitable Italian-he was like a city


policeman with operatic gestures-and the other, a


hairy, uncouth animal whom we called the Magyar; I


think he was a Transylvanian, or something even more


remote. Except the Magyar we were all big men, and at


the rush hours we collided incessantly.



   The work in the cafeterie was spasmodic. We were


never idle, but the real work only came in bursts of two


hours at a time-we called each burst «





un coup defeu."


The first





 coup de feu came at eight, when the guests


upstairs began to wake up and demand breakfast. At


eight a sudden banging and yelling would break out all through


the basement; bells rang on all sides, blue-aproned men


rushed through the passages, our service lifts came


down with a simultaneous crash, and the waiters on all


five floors began shouting Italian oaths down the


shafts. I don't remember all our duties, but they


included making tea, coffee and chocolate, fetching


meals from the kitchen, wines from the cellar and fruit


and so forth from the dining-room, slicing bread,


making toast, rolling pats of butter, measuring jam,


opening milk-cans, counting lumps of sugar, boiling


eggs, cooking porridge, pounding ice, grinding coffee-


all this for from a hundred to two hundred customers.


The kitchen was thirty yards away, and the dining-


room sixty or seventy yards. Everything. we sent up in


the service lifts had to be covered by a voucher, and the


vouchers had to be carefully filed, and there was


trouble if even a lump of sugar was lost. Besides this,


we had to supply the staff with bread and coffee, and


fetch the meals for the waiters upstairs. All in all, it


was a complicated job.



   I calculated that one had to walk and run about


fifteen miles during the day, and yet the strain of the


work was more mental than physical. Nothing could be


easier, on the face of it, than this stupid scullion work,


but it is astonishingly hard when one is in a hurry. One


has to leap to and fro between a multitude of jobs -it is


like sorting a pack of cards against the clock. You are,


for example, making toast, when bang! down comes a


service lift with an order for tea, rolls and three


different kinds of jam, and simultaneously bang! down


comes another demanding scrambled eggs, coffee and


grapefruit; you run to the kitchen for the eggs and to


the dining-room for the fruit, going like lightning so as


to be back before your toast burns, and having to re-


member about the tea and coffee, besides half a dozen


other orders that are still pending; and at the same time


some waiter is following you and making trouble about


a lost bottle of soda-water, and you are arguing with


him. It needs more brains than one might think. Mario


said, no doubt truly, that it took a year to make a


reliable cafetier.



   The time between eight and half-past ten was a sort


of delirium. Sometimes we were going as though we


had only five minutes to live; sometimes there were


sudden lulls when the orders stopped and everything


seemed quiet for a moment. Then we swept up the litter


from the floor, threw down fresh sawdust, and


swallowed gallipots of wine or coffee or water-any-


thing, so long as it was wet. Very often we used to


break off chunks of ice and suck them while we


worked. The heat among the gas-fires was nauseating;


we swallowed quarts of drink during the day, and after


a few hours even our aprons were drenched with sweat.


At times we were hopelessly behind with the work, and


some of the customers would have gone without their


breakfast, but Mario always pulled us through. He had


worked fourteen years in the cafeterie, and he had the


skill that never wastes a second between jobs. The


Magyar was very stupid and I was inexperienced, and


Boris was inclined to shirk, partly because of his lame


leg, partly because he was ashamed of working in the


cafeterie after being a waiter; but Mario was wonderful.


The way he would stretch his great arms right across


the cafeterie to fill a coffee-pot with one hand and boil


an egg with the other, at the same time watching toast


and shouting directions to the Magyar, and between


whiles singing snatches from





Rigoletto, was beyond all


praise. The





patron knew his value, and he was paid a


thousand francs a month, instead of five hundred like


the rest of us.




   The breakfast pandemonium stopped at half-past ten.


Then we scrubbed the cafeterie tables, swept the floor


and polished the brasswork, and, on good mornings,


went one at a time to the lavatory for a smoke. This was


our slack time-only relatively slack, however, for we


had only ten minutes for lunch, and we never got


through it uninterrupted. The customers' luncheon hour,


between twelve and two, was another period of turmoil


like the breakfast hour. Most of our work was fetching


meals from the kitchen, which meant constant





engueulades 


from the cooks. By this time the cooks had


sweated in front of their furnaces for four or five hours,


and their tempers were all warmed up.



   At two we were suddenly free men. We threw off our


aprons and put on our coats, hurried out of doors, and,


when we had money, dived into the nearest





bistro. It was


strange, coming up into the street from those firelit


cellars. The air seemed blindingly clear and cold, like


arctic summer; and how sweet the petrol did smell, after


the stenches of sweat and food! Sometimes we met


some of our cooks and waiters in the bistros, and they


were friendly and stood us drinks. Indoors we were their


slaves, but it is an etiquette in hotel life that between


hours everyone is equal, and the





engueulades do not


count.



   At a quarter to five we went back to the hotel. Till


half-past six there were no orders, and we used this time


to polish silver, clean out the coffee-urns, and do other


odd jobs. Then the grand turmoil of the day started-the


dinner hour. I wish I could be Zola for a little while, just


to describe that dinner hour. The essence of the situation


was that a hundred or two hundred people were


demanding individually different meals of five or six


courses, and that fifty or sixty people had to cook and


serve them and clean up the mess


afterwards; anyone with experience of catering will


know what that means. And at this time when the work


was doubled, the whole staff was tired out, and a


number of them were drunk. I could write pages about


the scene without giving a true idea of it. The chargings


to and fro in the narrow passages, the collisions, the


yells, the struggling with crates and trays and blocks of


ice, the heat, the darkness, the furious festering quarrels


which there was no time to fight out-they pass


description. Anyone coming into the basement for the


first time would have thought himself in a den of


maniacs. It was only later, when I understood the


working of a hotel, that I saw order in all this chaos.



   At half-past eight the work stopped very suddenly.


We were not free till nine, but we used to throw our-


selves full length on the floor, and lie there resting our


legs, too lazy even to go to the ice cupboard for a drink.


Sometimes the





chef du personnel would come in with


bottles of beer, for the hotel stood us an extra beer when


we had had a hard day. The food we were given was no


more than eatable, but the





patron was not mean about


drink; he allowed us two litres of wine a day each,


knowing that if a





plongeur is not given two litres he will


steal three. We had the heeltaps of bottles as well, so


that we often drank too much-a good thing, for one


seemed to work faster when partially drunk.



   Four days of the week passed like this; of the other


two working days, one was better and one worse. After


a week of this life I felt in need of a holiday. It was


Saturday night, so the people in our





bistro were busy


getting drunk, and with a free day ahead of me I was


ready to join them. We all went to bed, drunk, at two in


the morning, meaning to sleep till noon. At half-past


five I was suddenly awakened. A night-watchman,


sent from the hotel, was standing at my bedside. He


stripped the clothes back and shook me roughly.



   "Get up!" he said. «





Tu t'es bien saoul&#233; la gueule, eh? 


Well, never mind that, the hotel's a man short. You've


got to work to-day."



   "Why should I work?" I protested. "This is my day


off."



   "Day off, nothing! The work's got to be done. Get


up!»


I got up and went out, feeling as though my back


were broken and my skull filled with hot cinders. I did


not think that I could possibly do a day's work. And yet,


after only an hour in the basement, I found that I was


perfectly well. It seemed that in the heat of those


cellars, as in a turkish bath, one could sweat out almost


any quantity of drink.





Plongeurs know this, and count on


it. The power of swallowing quarts of wine, and then


sweating it out before it can do much damage, is one of


the compensations of their life.




                         XII



BY far my best time at the hotel was when I went to help


the waiter on the fourth floor. We worked in a small


pantry which communicated with the cafeterie by


service lifts. It was delightfully cool after the cellars,


and the work was chiefly polishing silver and glasses,


which is a humane job. Valenti, the waiter, was a decent


sort, and treated me almost as an equal when we were


alone, though he had to speak roughly when there was


anyone else present, for it does not do for a waiter to be


friendly with plongeurs. He used sometimes to tip me five


francs when he had had a good day. He was a comely


youth, aged twenty-four but looking eighteen,


and, like most waiters, he carried himself well and knew


how to wear his clothes. With his black tail-coat and


white tie, fresh face and sleek brown hair, he looked just


like an Eton boy; yet he had earned his living since he


was twelve, and worked his way up literally from the


gutter. Crossing the Italian frontier without a passport,


and selling chestnuts from a barrow on the northern


boulevards, and being given fifty days' imprisonment in


London for working without a permit, and being made


love to by a rich old woman in a hotel, who gave him a


diamond ring and afterwards accused him of stealing it,


were among his experiences. I used to enjoy talking to


him, at slack times when we sat smoking down the lift


shaft.



   My bad day was when I washed up for the diningroom.


I had not to wash the plates, which were done in the


kitchen, but only the other crockery, silver, knives and


glasses; yet, even so, it meant thirteen hours' work, and


I used between thirty and forty dishcloths during the


day. The antiquated methods used in France double the


work of washing up. Plate-racks are unheard-of, and


there are no soap-flakes, only the treacly soft soap,


which refuses to lather in the hard, Paris water. I worked


in a dirty, crowded little den, a pantry and scullery


combined, which gave straight on the diningroom.


Besides washing up, I had to fetch the waiters' food and


serve them at table; most of them were intolerably


insolent, and I had to use my fists more than once to get


common civility. The person who normally washed up


was a woman, and they made her life a misery.



   It was amusing to look round the filthy little scullery


and think that only a double door was between us and


the dining-room. There sat the customers in all their


splendour-spotless table-cloths, bowls of flowers,


mirrors and gilt cornices and painted cherubim; and


here, just a few feet away, we in our disgusting filth. For


it really was disgusting filth. There was no time to


sweep the floor till evening, and we slithered about in a


compound of soapy water, lettuce-leaves, torn paper and


trampled food. A dozen waiters with their coats off,


showing their sweaty armpits, sat at the table mixing


salads and sticking their thumbs into the cream pots. The


room had a dirty, mixed smell of food and sweat.


Everywhere in the cupboards, behind the piles of


crockery, were squalid stores of food that the waiters


had stolen. There were only two sinks, and no washing


basin, and it was nothing unusual for a waiter to wash


his face in the water in which clean crockery was


rinsing. But the customers saw nothing of this. There


were a coco-nut mat and a mirror outside the dining-


room door, and the waiters used to preen themselves up


and go in looking the picture of cleanliness.



   It is an instructive sight to see a waiter going into a


hotel dining-room. As he passes the door a sudden


change comes over him. The set of his shoulders alters;


all the dirt and hurry and irritation have dropped off in


an instant. He glides over the carpet, with a solemn


priest-like air. I remember our assistant maitre d'h&#244;tel, a


fiery Italian, pausing at the dining-room door to address


an apprentice who had broken a bottle of wine. Shaking


his fist above his head he yelled (luckily the door was


more or less soundproof)



   «





Tu me fais-----


    Do you call yourself a waiter, you


young bastard? You a waiter! You're not fit to scrub


floors in the brothel your mother came from.


Maquereau! »



   Words failing him, he turned to the door; and as he


opened it he delivered a final insult in the same manner


as Squire Western in





Tom Jones.



   Then he entered the dining-room and sailed across it


dish in hand, graceful as a swan. Ten seconds later he


was bowing reverently to a customer. And you could


not help thinking, as you saw him bow and smile, with


that benign smile of the trained waiter, that the cus-


tomer was put to shame by having such an aristocrat to


serve him.



   This washing up was a thoroughly odious job-not


hard, but boring and silly beyond words. It is dreadful


to think that some people spend their whole decades at


such occupations. The woman whom I replaced was


quite sixty years old, and she stood at the sink thirteen


hours a day, six days a week, the year round; she was,


in addition, horribly bullied by the waiters. She gave


out that she had once been an actress-actually, I


imagine, a prostitute; most prostitutes end as char-


women. It was strange to see that in spite of her age and


her life she still wore a bright blonde wig, and darkened


her eyes and painted her face like a girl of twenty. So


apparently even a seventy-eight-hour week can leave


one with some vitality.




                         XIII



ON my third day at the hotel the





chef du personnel, who


had generally spoken to me in quite a pleasant tone,


called me up and said sharply:



   "Here, you, shave that moustache off at once!





Nom de 





Dieu


, who ever heard of a





plongeur with a moustache?"



   I began to protest, but he cut me short. "A





plongeur 


with a moustache-nonsense! Take care I don't see you


with it to-morrow."



   On the way home I asked Boris what this meant.


He shrugged his shoulders. "You must do what he says,





mon ami


. No one in the hotel wears a moustache, except


the cooks. I should have thought you would have


noticed it. Reason? There is no reason. It is the


custom."



   I saw that it was an etiquette, like not wearing a white


tie with a dinner jacket, and shaved off my moustache.


Afterwards I found out the explanation of the custom,


which is this: waiters in good hotels do not wear


moustaches, and to show their superiority they decree


that





plongeurs shall not wear them either; and the cooks


wear their moustaches to show their contempt for the


waiters.



   This gives some idea of the elaborate caste system


existing in a hotel. Our staff, amounting to about a


hundred and ten, had their prestige graded as accurately


as that of soldiers, and a cook or waiter was as much


above a





plongeur as a captain above a private. Highest of


all came the manager, who could sack anybody, even the


cooks. We never saw the





patron, and all we knew of him


was that his meals had to be prepared more carefully than


that of the customers; all the discipline of the hotel


depended on the manager. He was a conscientious man,


and always on the lookout for slackness, but we were too


clever for him. A system of service bells ran through the


hotel, and the whole staff used these for signalling to one


another. A long ring and a short ring, followed by two


more long rings, meant that the manager was coming,


and when we heard it we took care to look busy.



   Below the manager came the





maitre d'h&#244;tel. He did not


serve at table, unless to a lord or someone of that kind,


but directed the other waiters and helped with the


catering. His tips, and his bonus from the champagne


companies (it was two francs for each cork he


returned to them), came to two hundred francs a day. He


was in a position quite apart from the rest of the staff,


and took his meals in a private room, with silver on the


table and two apprentices in clean white jackets to serve


him. A little below the head waiter came the head cook,


drawing about five thousand francs a month; he dined in


the kitchen, but at a separate table, and one of the


apprentice cooks waited on him. Then came the





chef du 





personnel


; he drew only fifteen hundred francs a month,


but he wore a black coat and did no manual work, and he


could sack





plongeurs and fine waiters. Then came the other


cooks, drawing anything between three thousand and


seven hundred and fifty francs a month; then the waiters,


making about seventy francs a day in tips, besides a


small retaining fee; then the laundresses and sewing


women; then the apprentice waiters, who received no


tips, but were paid seven hundred and fifty francs a


month; then the





plongeurs, also at seven hundred and fifty


francs; then the chambermaids, at five or six hundred


francs a month; and lastly the cafetiers, at five hundred a


month. We of the cafeterie were the very dregs of the


hotel, despised and tutoied by everyone.



   There were various others-the office employees,


called generally couriers, the storekeeper, the cellarman,


some porters and pages, the ice man, the bakers, the


night-watchman, the doorkeeper. Different jobs were


done by different races. The office employees and the


cooks and sewing-women were French, the waiters


Italians and Germans (there is hardly such a thing as a


French waiter in Paris), the





plongeurs of every race in


Europe, beside Arabs and negroes. French was the lingua


franca, even the Italians speaking it to one another.



   All the departments had their special perquisites.


In all Paris hotels it is the custom to sell the broken


bread to bakers for eight sous a pound, and the kitchen


scraps to pigkeepers for a trifle, and to divide the pro-


ceeds of this among the





plongeurs. There was much


pilfering, too. The waiters all stole food-in fact, I


seldom saw a waiter trouble to eat the rations provided


for him by the hotel-and the cooks did it on a larger


scale in the kitchen, and we in the cafeterie swilled


illicit tea and coffee. The cellarman stole brandy. By a


rule of the hotel the waiters were not allowed to keep


stores of spirits, but had to go to the cellarman for each


drink as it was ordered. As the cellarman poured out the


drinks he would set aside perhaps a teaspoonful from


each glass, and he amassed quantities in this way. He


would sell you the stolen brandy for five sous a swig if


he thought he could trust you.



   There were thieves among the staff, and if you left


money in your coat pockets it was generally taken. The


doorkeeper, who paid our wages and searched us for


stolen food, was the greatest thief in the hotel. Out of


my five hundred francs a month, this man actually


managed to cheat me of a hundred and fourteen francs in


six weeks. I had asked to be paid daily, so the door-


keeper paid me sixteen francs each evening, and, by not


paying for Sundays (for which of course payment was


due), pocketed sixty-four francs. Also, I sometimes


worked on a Sunday, for which, though I did not know


it, I was entitled to an extra twenty-five francs. The


doorkeeper never paid me this either, and so made away


with another seventy-five francs. I only realised during


my last week that I was being cheated, and, as I could


prove nothing, only twenty-five francs were refunded.


The doorkeeper played similar tricks on any employee


who was fool enough to be taken in. He called


himself a Greek, but in reality he was an Armenian.


After knowing him I saw the force of the proverb


"Trust a snake before a Jew and a Jew before a Greek,


but don't trust an Armenian."



   There were queer characters among the waiters. One


was a gentleman-a youth who had been educated at a


university, and had had a well-paid job in a business


office. He had caught a venereal disease, lost his job,


drifted, and now considered himself lucky to be a


waiter. Many of the waiters had slipped into France


without passports, and one or two of them were spies --it


is a common profession for a spy to adopt. One day


there was a fearful row in the waiters' dining-room


between Morandi, a dangerous-looking man with eyes


set too far apart, and another Italian. It appeared that


Morandi had taken the other man's mistress. The other


man, a weakling and obviously frightened of Morandi,


was threatening vaguely.



   Morandi jeered at him. "Well, what are you going to


do about it? I've slept with your girl, slept with her three


times. It was fine. What can you do, eh?"



   "I can denounce you to the secret police. You are an


Italian spy."



   Morandi did not deny it. He simply produced a razor


from his tail pocket and made two swift strokes in the


air, as though slashing a man's cheeks open. Whereat the


other waiter took it back.



   The queerest type I ever saw in the hotel was an


"extra." He had been engaged at twenty-five francs for


the day to replace the Magyar, who was ill. He was a


Serbian, a thick-set nimble fellow of about twenty-five,


speaking six languages, including English. He seemed to


know all about hotel work, and up till midday he worked


like a slave. Then, as soon as it had struck twelve, he


turned sulky, shirked his work, stole wine,


and finally crowned all by loafing about openly with a


pipe in his mouth. Smoking, of course, was forbidden


under severe penalties. The manager himself heard of it


and came down to interview the Serbian, fuming with


rage.



   "What the devil do you mean by smoking here?" he


cried.



   "What the devil do you mean by having a face like


that?" answered the Serbian, calmly.



   I cannot convey the blasphemy of such a remark. The


head cook, if a





plongeur had spoken to him like that,


would have thrown a saucepan of hot soup in his face.


The manager said instantly, "You're sacked!" and at two


o'clock the Serbian was given his twenty-five francs and


duly sacked. Before he went out Boris asked him in


Russian what game he was playing. He said the Serbian


answered



   "Look here,





mon vieux, they've got to pay me a day's


wages if I work up to midday, haven't they? That's the


law. And where's the sense of working after I get my


wages? So I'll tell you what I do. I go to a hotel and get


a job as an extra, and up to midday I work hard. Then,


the moment it's struck twelve, I start raising such hell


that they've no choice but to sack me. Neat, eh? Most


days I'm sacked by half-past twelve; to-day it was two


o'clock; but I don't care, I've saved four hours' work.


The only trouble is, one can't do it at the same hotel


twice."



   It appeared that he had played this game at half the


hotels and restaurants in Paris. It is probably quite an


easy game to play during the summer, though the hotels


protect themselves against it as well as they can by


means of a black list.




                         XIV



IN a few days I had grasped the main principles on


which the hotel was run. The thing that would astonish


anyone coming for the first time into the service


quarters of a hotel would be the fearful noise and


disorder during the rush hours. It is something so


different from the steady work in a shop or a factory


that it looks at first sight like mere bad management.


But it is really quite unavoidable, and for this reason.


Hotel work is not particularly hard, but by its nature it


comes in rushes and cannot be economised. You cannot,


for instance, grill a steak two hours before it is wanted;


you have to wait till the last moment, by which time a


mass of other work has accumulated, and then do it all


together, in frantic haste. The result is that at meal-


times everyone is doing two men's work, which is


impossible without noise and quarrelling. Indeed the


quarrels are a necessary part of the process, for the pace


would never be kept up if everyone did not accuse


everyone else of idling. It was for this reaon that during


the rush hours the whole staff raged and cursed like


demons. At those times there was scarcely a verb in the


hotel except foutre. A girl in the bakery, aged sixteen,


used oaths that would have defeated a cabman. (Did not


Hamlet say "cursing like a scullion"? No doubt


Shakespeare had watched scullions at work.) But we are


not losing our heads and wasting time; we were just


stimulating one another for the effort of packing four


hours' work into two hours.



   What keeps a hotel going is the fact that the em-


ployees take a genuine pride in their work, beastly and


silly though it is. If a man idles, the others soon find him


out, and conspire against him to get him sacked.



Cooks, waiters and





plongeurs differ greatly in outlook,


but they are all alike in being proud of their efficiency.



   Undoubtedly the most workmanlike class, and the


least servile, are the cooks. They do not earn quite so


much as waiters, but their prestige is higher and their


employment steadier. The cook does not look upon


himself as a servant, but as a skilled workman; he is


generally called «





un ouvrier, » which a waiter never is.


He knows his power-knows that he alone makes or mars


a restaurant, and that if he is five minutes late


everything is out of gear, He despises the whole non-


cooking staff, and makes it a point of honour to insult


everyone below the head waiter. And he takes a genuine


artistic pride in his work, which demands very great


skill. It is not the cooking that is so difficult, but the


doing everything to time. Between breakfast and lun-


cheon the head cook at the H&#244;tel X. would receive


orders for several hundred dishes, all to be served at


different times; he cooked few of them himself, but he


gave instructions about all of them and inspected them


before they were sent up. His memory was wonderful.


The vouchers were pinned on a board, but the head cook


seldom looked at them; everything was stored in his


mind, and exactly to the minute, as each dish fell due,


he would call out, «





Faites marcher une c&#244;telette de veau » (or


whatever it was) unfailingly. He was an insufferable


bully, but he was also an artist. It is for their punctu-


ality, and not for any superiority in technique, that men


cooks are preferred to women.



   The waiter's outlook is quite different. He too is


proud in a way of his skill, but his skill is chiefly in


being servile. His work gives him the mentality, not of a


workman, but of a snob. He lives perpetually in sight of


rich people, stands at their tables, listens to their conver


sation, sucks up to them with smiles and discreet little


jokes. He has the pleasure of spending money by proxy.


Moreover, there is always the chance that he may


become rich himself, for, though most waiters die poor,


they have long runs of luck occasionally. At some caf&#233;s


on the Grand Boulevard there is so much money to be


made that the waiters actually pay the





patron for their


employment. The result is that between constantly


seeing money, and hoping to get it, the waiter comes to


identify himself to some extent with his employers. He


will take pains to serve a meal in style, because he feels


that he is participating in the meal himself.



   I remember Valenti telling me of some banquet at


Nice at which he had once served, and of how it cost


two hundred thousand francs and was talked of for


months afterwards. "It was splendid,





mon p'tit, mais





magnifique


! Jesus Christ! The champagne, the silver, the


orchids-I have never seen anything like them, and I have


seen some things. Ah, it was glorious!"



   "But, " I said, "you were only there to wait?"



   "Oh, of course. But still, it was splendid."



   The moral is, never be sorry for a waiter. Sometimes


when you sit in a restaurant, still stuffing yourself half


an hour after closing time, you feel that the tired waiter


at your side must surely be despising you. But he is not.


He is not thinking as he looks at you, "What an overfed


lout"; he is thinking, "One day, when I have saved


enough money, I shall be able to imitate that man." He is


ministering to a kind of pleasure he thoroughly


understands and admires. And that is why waiters are


seldom Socialists, have no effective trade union, and


will work twelve hours a day-they work fifteen hours,


seven days a week, in many caf&#233;s. They are snobs, and


they find the servile nature of their work rather con-


genial.




   The





plongeurs, again, have a different outlook. Theirs


is a job which offers no prospects, is intensely exhaust-


ing, and at the same time has not a trace of skill or


interest; the sort of job that would always be done by


women if women were strong enough. All that is re-


quired of them is to be constantly on the run, and to put


up with long hours and a stuffy atmosphere. They have


no way of escaping from this life, for they cannot save a


penny from their wages, and working from sixty to a


hundred hours a week leaves them no time to train for


anything else. The best they can hope for is to find a


slightly softer job as night-watchman or lavatory


attendant.



   And yet the





plongeurs, low as they are, also have a


kind of pride. It is the pride of the drudge-the man who


is equal to no matter what quantity of work. At that


level, the mere power to go on working like an ox is


about the only virtue attainable.





D&#233;brouillard is what


every plongeur wants to be called. A





d&#233;brouillard is a man


who, even when he is told to do the impossible, will





se 





d&#233;brouille


r-get it done somehow. One of the kitchen


plongeurs at the H&#244;tel X., a German, was well known as


a





d&#233;brouillard. One night an English lord came to the


hotel, and the waiters were in despair, for the lord had


asked for peaches, and there were none in stock; it was


late at night, and the shops would be shut. "Leave it to


me," said the German. He went out, and in ten minutes


he was back with four peaches. He had gone into a


neighbouring restaurant and stolen them. That is what is


meant by a





d&#233;brouillard. The English lord paid for the


peaches at twenty francs each.



   Mario, who was in charge of the cafeterie, had the


typical drudge mentality. All he thought of was getting


through the «





boulot, » and he defied you to give him


too much of it. Fourteen years underground had


left him with about as much natural laziness as a piston


rod. «





Faut &#233;tre dur, » he used to say when anyone


complained. You will often hear plongeurs boast, «





Je suis 





dur


"-as though they were soldiers, not male charwomen.



   Thus everyone in the hotel had his sense of honour,


and when the press of work came we were all ready for a


grand concerted effort to get through it. The constant


war between the different departments also made for


efficiency, for everyone clung to his own privileges and


tried to stop the others idling and pilfering.



   This is the good side of hotel work. In a hotel a huge


and complicated machine is kept running by an inade-


quate staff, because every man has a well-defined job


and does it scrupulously. But there is a weak point, and


it is this-that the job the staff are doing is not necessarily


what the customer pays for. The customer pays, as he


sees it, for good service; the employee is paid, as he sees


it, for the boulot-meaning, as a rule, an imitation of good


service. The result is that, though hotels are miracles of


punctuality, they are worse than the worst private houses


in the things that matter.



   Take cleanliness, for example. The dirt in the H&#244;tel


X., as soon as one penetrated into the service quarters,


was revolting. Our cafeterie had year-old filth in all the


dark corners, and the bread-bin was infested with cock-


roaches. Once I suggested killing these beasts to Mario.


"Why kill the poor animals?" he said reproachfully. The


others laughed when I wanted to wash my hands before


touching the butter. Yet we were clean where we


recognised cleanliness as part of the boulot. We


scrubbed the tables and polished the brasswork regu-


larly, because we had orders to do that; but we had no


orders to be genuinely clean, and in any case we had no


time for it. We were simply carrying out our duties;


and as our first duty was punctuality, we saved time by


being dirty.



   In the kitchen the dirt was worse. It is not a figure of


speech, it is a mere statement of fact to say that a


French cook will spit in the soup-that is, if he is not


going to drink it himself. He is an artist, but his art is


not cleanliness. To a certain extent he is even dirty


because he is an artist, for food, to look smart, needs


dirty treatment. When a steak, for instance, is brought


up for the head cook's inspection, he does not handle it


with a fork. He picks it up in his fingers and slaps it


down, runs his thumb round the dish and licks it to


taste the gravy, runs it round and licks again, then


steps back and contemplates the piece of meat like an


artist judging a picture, then presses it lovingly into


place with his fat, pink fingers, every one of which he


has licked a hundred times that morning. When he is


satisfied, he takes a cloth and wipes his fingerprints


from the dish, and hands it to the waiter. And the


waiter, of course, dips his fingers into the gravy-his


nasty, greasy fingers which he is for ever running


through his brilliantined hair. Whenever one pays more


than, say, ten francs for a dish of meat in Paris, one may


be certain that it has been fingered in this manner. In


very cheap restaurants it is different; there, the same


trouble is not taken over the food, and it is just forked


out of the pan and flung on to a plate, without handling.


Roughly speaking, the more one pays for food, the more


sweat and spittle one is obliged to eat with it.



   Dirtiness is inherent in hotels and restaurants,


because sound food is sacrificed to punctuality and


smartness. The hotel employee is too busy getting food


ready to remember that it is meant to be eaten. A meal


is simply «





une commande » to him, just as a man dying of


cancer is simply "





a case" to the doctor. A customer


orders, for example, a piece of toast. Somebody, pressed


with work in a cellar deep underground, has to prepare it.


How can he stop and say to himself, "This toast is to be


eaten-I must make it eatable"? All he knows is that it must


look right and must be ready in three minutes. Some large


drops of sweat fall from his forehead on to the toast. Why


should he worry? Presently the toast falls among the filthy


sawdust on the floor. Why trouble to make a new piece? It


is much quicker to wipe the sawdust off. On the way


upstairs the toast falls again, butter side down. Another


wipe is all it needs. And so with everything. The only food


at the H&#244;tel X. which was ever prepared cleanly was the


staff's, and the





patron's. The maxim, repeated by everyone,


was: "Look out for the





patron, and as for the clients,





s'en f-- 





pas mal


! » Everywhere in the service quarters dirt festered-a


secret vein of dirt, running through the great garish hotel


like the intestines through a man's body.



   Apart from the dirt, the





patron swindled the customers


wholeheartedly. For the most part the materials of the food


were very bad, though the cooks knew how to serve it up in


style. The meat was at best ordinary, and as to the


vegetables, no good housekeeper would have looked at


them in the market. The cream, by a standing order, was


diluted with milk. The tea and coffee were of inferior sorts,


and the jam was synthetic stuff out of vast, unlabelled tins.


All the cheaper wines, according to Boris, were corked vin


ordinaire. There was a rule that employees must pay for


anything they spoiled, and in consequence damaged things


were seldom thrown away. Once the waiter on the third


floor dropped a roast chicken down the shaft of our service


lift, where it fell into a litter of broken bread, torn paper


and so forth at the bottom. We simply wiped it with a cloth and


sent it up again. Upstairs there were dirty tales of once-used


sheets not being washed, but simply damped, ironed and put back


on the beds. The patron was as mean to us as to the


customers. Throughout the vast hotel there was not,


for instance, such a thing as a brush and pan; one had


to manage with a broom and a piece of cardboard. And


the staff lavatory was worthy of Central Asia, and there


was no place to wash one's hands, except the sinks


used for washing crockery.



   In spite of all this the H&#244;tel X. was one of the dozen


most expensive hotels in Paris, and the customers paid


startling prices. The ordinary charge for a night's


lodging, not including breakfast, was two hundred


francs. All wine and tobacco were sold at exactly double


shop prices, though of course the patron bought at the


wholesale price. If a customer had a title, or was


reputed to be a millionaire, all his charges went up


automatically. One morning on the fourth floor an


American who was on diet wanted only salt and hot


water for his breakfast. Valenti was furious. "Jesus


Christ!" he said, "what about my ten per cent.? Ten per


cent. of salt and water!" And he charged twentyfive


francs for the breakfast. The customer paid without a


murmur.



   According to Boris, the same kind of thing went on


in all Paris hotels, or at least in all the big, expensive


ones. But I imagine that the customers at the Hotel X.


were especially easy to swindle, for they were mostly


Americans, with a sprinkling of English-no Frenchand


seemed to know nothing whatever about good food.


They would stuff themselves with disgusting American


"cereals," and eat marmalade at tea, and drink ver-


mouth after dinner, and order a poulet &#224; la reine at a


hundred francs and then souse it in Worcester sauce.


One customer, from Pittsburg, dined every night in his


bedroom on grape-nuts, scrambled eggs and cocoa.


Perhaps it hardly matters whether such people are


swindled or not.




                       XV



HEARD queer tales in the hotel. There were tales of


dope fiends, of old debauchees who frequented hotels in


search of pretty page boys, of thefts and blackmail.


Mario told me of a hotel in which he had been, where a


chambermaid stole a priceless diamond ring from an


American lady. For days the staff were searched as they


left work, and two detectives searched the hotel from


top to bottom, but the ring was never found. The


chambermaid had a lover in the bakery, and he had


baked the ring into a roll, where it lay unsuspected


until the search was over.



   Once Valenti, at a slack time, told me a story about


himself.



   "You know,





mon p'tit, this hotel life is all very well,


but it's the devil when you're out of work. I expect you


know what it is to go without eating, eh?





Forc&#233;ment,


otherwise you wouldn't be scrubbing dishes. Well, I'm


not a poor devil of a





plongeur; I'm a waiter, and I went


five days without eating, once. Five days without even a


crust of bread Jesus Christ!



   "I tell you, those five days were the devil. The only


good thing was, I had my rent paid in advance. I was


living in a dirty, cheap little hotel in the Rue Sainte


&#201;loise up in the Latin quarter. It was called the Hotel


Suzanne May, after some famous prostitute of the time


of the Empire. I was starving, and there was nothing I


could do; I couldn't even go to the caf&#233;s where the hotel


proprietors come to engage waiters, because I



hadn't the price of a drink. All I could do was to lie in


bed getting weaker and weaker, and watching the bugs


running about the ceiling. I don't want to go through


that again, I can tell you.



   "In the afternoon of the fifth day I went half mad; at


least, that's how it seems to me now. There was an old


faded print of a woman's head hanging on the wall of


my room, and I took to wondering who it could be; and


after about an hour I realised that it must be Sainte


&#201;loise, who was the patron saint of the quarter. I had


never taken any notice of the thing before, but now, as I


lay staring at it, a most extraordinary idea came into my


head.



   "





'&#201;coute, mon cher,' I said to myself, 'you'll be


starving to death if this goes on much longer. You've


got to do something. Why not try a prayer to Sainte


&#201;loise? Go down on your knees and ask her to send you


some money. After all, it can't do any harm. Try it!'



   "Mad, eh? Still, a man will do anything when he's


hungry. Besides, as I said, it couldn't do any harm. I got


out of bed and began praying. I said:



   " 'Dear Sainte &#201;loise, if you exist, please send me


some money. I don't ask for much just enough to buy


some bread and a bottle of wine and get my strength


back. Three or four francs would do. You don't know


how grateful I'll be, Sainte &#201;loise, if you help me this


once. And be sure, if you send me anything, the first


thing I'll do will be to go and burn a candle for you, at


your church down the street. Amen.'



   "I put in that about the candle, because I had heard


that saints like having candles burnt in their honour. I


meant to keep my promise, of course. But I am an


atheist and I didn't really believe that anything would


come of it.



   "Well, I got into bed again, and five minutes later


there came a bang at the door. It was a girl called Maria,


a big fat peasant girl who lived at our hotel. She was a


very stupid girl, but. a good sort, and I didn't much care


for her to see me in the state I was in.



   "She cried out at the sight of me.





'Nom de Dieu!' she


said, 'what's the matter with you? What are you doing


in bed at this time of day?





Quelle mine que tu as! You look


more like a corpse than a man.'



   "Probably I did look a sight. I had been five days


without food, most of the time in bed, and it was three


days since I had had a wash or a shave. The room was a


regular pigsty, too.



   " 'What's the matter?' said Maria again.



   " 'The matter!' I said; 'Jesus Christ! I'm starving. I


haven't eaten for five days. That's what's the matter.'



   "Maria was horrified. 'Not eaten for five days?' she


said. 'But why? Haven't you any money, then?'



   " 'Money!' I said. 'Do you suppose I should be


starving if I had money? I've got just five sous in the


world, and I've pawned everything. Look round the


room and see if there's anything more I can sell or


pawn. If you can find anything that will fetch fifty


centimes, you're cleverer than I am.'



   "Maria began looking round the room. She poked


here and there among a lot of rubbish that was lying


about, and then suddenly she got quite excited. Her


great thick mouth fell open with astonishment.



   " 'You idiot!' she cried out. 'Imbecile! What's





this,


then?'



   "I saw that she had picked up an empty oil





bidon that


had been lying in the corner. I had bought it weeks


before, for an oil lamp I had before I sold my things.



   " 'That?' I said. 'That's an oil





bidon. What about it?'



   " 'Imbecile! Didn't you pay three francs fifty


deposit on it?'



   "Now, of course I had paid the three francs fifty.


They always make you pay a deposit on the





bidon, and


you get it back when the





bidon is returned. But I'd for-


gotten all about it.



   " 'Yes---' I began.



   " 'Idiot!' shouted Maria again. She got so excited


that she began to dance about until I thought her


sabots would go through the floor. 'Idiot!





T'es fou!T'es





fou


! What have you got to do but take it back to the


shop and get your deposit back? Starving, with three


francs fifty staring you in the face! Imbecile!'



  "I can hardly believe now that in all those five days


I had never once thought of taking the





bidon back to the


shop. As good as three francs fifty in hard cash, and it


had never occurred to me! I sat up in bed. 'Quick!' I


shouted to Maria, 'you take it for me. Take it to the


grocer's at the corner-run like the devil. And bring


back food!



   Maria didn't need to be told. She grabbed the bidon


and went clattering down the stairs like a herd of


elephants, and in three minutes she was back with two


pounds of bread under one arm and a half-litre bottle


of wine under the other. I didn't stop to thank her; I


just seized the bread and sank my teeth in it. Have you


noticed how bread tastes when you have been hungry


for a long time? Cold, wet, doughy-like putty almost.


But, Jesus Christ, how good it was! As for the wine, I


sucked it all down in one draught, and it seemed to go


straight into my veins and flow round my body like


new blood. Ah, that made a difference!



   "I wolfed the whole two pounds of bread without


stopping to take breath. Maria stood with her hands on


her hips, watching me eat. 'Well, you feel better, eh?'


she said when I had finished.



   " 'Better!' I said. 'I feel perfect! I'm not the same


man as I was five minutes ago. There's only one thing


in the world I need now-a cigarette.'



   "Maria put her hand in her apron pocket. 'You can't


have it,' she said. 'I've no money. This is all I had left


out of your three francs fifty-seven sous. It's no good;


the cheapest cigarettes are twelve sous a packet.'



   " 'Then I can have them!' I said. 'Jesus Christ, what


a piece of luck! I've got five sous-it's just enough.'



   "Maria took the twelve sous and was starting out to the


tobacconist's. And then something I had forgotten all


this time came into my head. There was that cursed


Sainte &#201;loise! I had promised her a candle if she sent


me money; and really, who could say that the prayer


hadn't come true? 'Three or four francs,' I had said;


and the next moment along came three francs fifty.


There was no getting away from it. I should have to


spend my twelve sous on a candle.



   "I called Maria back. 'It's no use,' I said; 'there is


Sainte &#201;loise-I have promised her a candle. The twelve


sous will have to go on that. Silly, isn't it? I can't have


my cigarettes after all.'



   « 'Sainte &#201;loise?' said Maria. 'What about Sainte


&#201;loise?'



   " 'I prayed to her for money and promised her a


candle,' I said. 'She answered the prayer-at any rate,


the money turned up. I shall have to buy that candle.


It's a nuisance, but it seems to me I must keep my


promise.'



   " 'But what put Sainte &#201;loise into your head?' said


Maria.



   " 'It was her picture,' I said, and I explained the


whole thing. 'There she is, you see,' I said, and I pointed


to the picture on the wall.



   "Maria looked at the picture, and then to my surprise


she burst into shouts of laughter. She laughed more and


more, stamping about the room and holding her fat sides


as though they would burst. I thought she had gone mad.


It was two minutes before she could speak.



   " 'Idiot!' she cried at last.





'T'es fou! T'es fou! Do you


mean to tell me you really knelt down and prayed to that


picture? Who told you it was Sainte &#201;loise?'



   " 'But I made sure it was Sainte &#201;loise!' I said.



   " 'Imbecile! It isn't Sainte &#201;loise at all. Who do you


think it is?'



   " 'Who?' I said.


" 'It is Suzanne May, the woman this hotel is called


after.'



   "I had been praying to Suzanne May, the famous


prostitute of the Empire. . . .



   "But, after all, I wasn't sorry. Maria and I had a good


laugh, and then we talked it over, and we made out that I


didn't owe Sainte &#201;loise anything. Clearly it wasn't she


who had answered the prayer, and there was no need to


buy her a candle. So I had my packet of cigarettes after


all."




                        XVI



TIME went on and the Auberge de Jehan Cottard showed


no signs of opening. Boris and I went down there one


day during our afternoon interval and found that none of


the alterations had been done, except the indecent


pictures, and there were three duns instead of two. The





patron


 greeted us with his usual blandness,


and the next instant turned to me (his prospective


dishwasher) and borrowed five francs. After that I felt


certain that the restaurant would never get beyond talk.


The





patron, however, again named the opening for


"exactly a fortnight from to-day," and introduced us to


the woman who was to do the cooking, a Baltic Russian


five feet tall and a yard across the hips. She told us that


she had been a singer before she came down to cooking,


and that she was very artistic and adored English


literature, especially





La Case de l'Oncle Tom.



   In a fortnight I had got so used to the routine of a





plongeur's


 life that I could hardly imagine anything


different. It was a life without much variation. At a


quarter to six one woke with a sudden start, tumbled into


grease-stiffened clothes, and hurried out with dirty face


and protesting muscles. It was dawn, and the windows


were dark except for the workmen's caf&#233;s. The sky was


like a vast flat wall of cobalt, with roofs and spires of


black paper pasted upon it. Drowsy men were sweeping


the pavements with ten-foot besoms, and ragged families


picking over the dustbins. Workmen, and girls with a


piece of chocolate in one hand and a croissant in the


other, were pouring into the Metro stations. Trams, filled


with more workmen, boomed gloomily past. One


hastened down to the station, fought for a place-one does


literally have to fight on the Paris Metro at six in the


morning-and stood jammed in the swaying mass of


passengers, nose to nose with some hideous French face,


breathing sour wine and garlic. And then one descended


into the labyrinth of the hotel basement, and forgot


daylight till two o'clock, when the sun was hot and the


town black with people and cars.



   After my first week at the hotel I always spent the


afternoon interval in sleeping, or, when I had money,



in a





bistro. Except for a few ambitious waiters who went


to English classes, the whole staff wasted their leisure in


this way; one seemed too lazy after the morning's work


to do anything better. Sometimes half a dozen





plongeurs 


would make up a party and go to an abominable brothel


in the Rue de Siey&#232;s, where the charge was only five


francs twenty-five centimes-tenpence half-penny. It was


nicknamed «





le prix fixe, » and they used to describe


their experiences there as a great joke. It was a favourite


rendezvous of hotel workers. The





plongeurs' wages did


not allow them to marry, and no doubt work in the


basement does not encourage fastidious feelings.



   For another four hours one was in the cellars, and


then one emerged, sweating, into the cool street. It was


lamplight-that strange purplish gleam of the Paris lamps-


and beyond the river the Eiffel Tower flashed from top


to bottom with zigzag skysigns, like enormous snakes of


fire. Streams of cars glided silently to and fro, and


women, exquisite-looking in the dim light, strolled up


and down the arcade. Sometimes a woman would glance


at Boris or me, and then, noticing our greasy clothes,


look hastily away again. One fought another battle in the


Metro and was home by ten. Generally from ten to


midnight I went to a little





bistro in our street, an


underground place frequented by Arab navvies. It was a


bad place for fights, and I sometimes saw bottles thrown,


once with fearful effect, but as a rule the Arabs fought


among themselves and let Christians alone. Raki, the


Arab drink, was very cheap, and the bistro was open at


all hours, for the Arabs-lucky men-had the power of


working all day and drinking all night.



   It was the typical life of a





plongeur, and it did not


seem a bad life at the time. I had no sensation of


poverty, for even after paying my rent and setting aside


enough for tobacco and journeys and my food on


Sundays, I still had four francs a day for drinks, and four


francs was wealth. There was-it is hard to express it-a


sort of heavy contentment, the contentment a well-fed


beast might feel, in a life which had become so simple.


For nothing could be simpler than the life of a





plongeur.


He lives in a rhythm between work and sleep, without


time to think, hardly conscious of the exterior world; his


Paris has shrunk to the hotel, the Metro, a few bistros


and his bed. If he goes afield, it is only a few streets


away, on a trip with some servantgirl who sits on his


knee swallowing oysters and beer. On his free day he


lies in bed till noon, puts on a clean shirt, throws dice for


drinks, and after lunch goes back to bed again. Nothing


is quite real to him but the





boulot, drinks and sleep; and


of these sleep is the most important.



   One night, in the small hours, there was a murder just


beneath my window. I was woken by a fearful uproar,


and, going to the window, saw a man lying flat on the


stones below; I could see the murderers, three of them,


flitting away at the end of the street. Some of us went


down and found that the man was quite dead, his skull


cracked with a piece of lead piping. I remember the


colour of his blood, curiously purple, like wine; it was


still on the cobbles when I came home that evening, and


they said the schoolchildren had come from miles round


to see it. But the thing that strikes me in looking back is


that I was in bed and asleep within three minutes of the


murder. So were most of the people in the street; we just


made sure that the man was done for, and went straight


back to bed. We were working people, and where was


the sense of wasting sleep over a murder?



   Work in the hotel taught me the true value of sleep,


just as being hungry had taught me the true value of


food. Sleep had ceased to be a mere physical necessity; it


was something voluptuous, a debauch more than a relief.


I had no more trouble with the bugs. Mario had told me


of a sure remedy for them, namely pepper, strewed thick


over the bedclothes. It made me sneeze, but the bugs all


hated it, and emigrated to other rooms.




                          XVII



WITH thirty francs a week to spend on drinks I could


take part in the social life of the quarter. We had some


jolly evenings, on Saturdays, in the little bistro at the foot


of the H&#244;tel des Trois Moineaux.



   The brick-floored room, fifteen feet square, was


packed with twenty people, and the air dim with smoke.


The noise was deafening, for everyone was either talking


at the top of his voice or singing. Sometimes it was just a


confused din of voices; sometimes everyone would burst


out together in the same songthe " Marseillaise, » or the


" Internationale, » or " Madelon," or " Les Fraises et les


Framboises. » Azaya, a great clumping peasant girl who


worked fourteen hours a day in a glass factory, sang a


song about, "





Il a perdu ses pantalons, tout en dansant le 





Charleston


." Her friend Marinette, a thin, dark Corsican


girl of obstinate virtue, tied her knees together and


danced the





danse du ventre. The old Rougiers wandered


in and out, cadging drinks and trying to tell a long,


involved story about someone who had once cheated


them over a bedstead. R., cadaverous and silent, sat in


his corner quietly boozing. Charlie, drunk, half danced,


half staggered to and fro with a glass of sham absinthe


balanced in one fat hand, pinching the women's breasts


and declaiming poetry. People played darts and diced


for drinks. Manuel, a Spaniard, dragged the girls to the


bar and shook the dice-box against their bellies, for


luck. Madame F. stood at the bar rapidly pouring





chopines


 of wine through the pewter funnel, with a wet


dishcloth always handy, because every man in the room


tried to make love to her. Two children, bastards of big


Louis the bricklayer, sat in a corner sharing a glass of





sirop


. Everyone was very happy, overwhelmingly


certain that the world was a good place and we a notable


set of people.



   For an hour the noise scarcely slackened. Then about


midnight there was a piercing shout of «





Citoyens! » and


the sound of a chair falling over. A blond, red-faced


workman had risen to his feet and was banging a bottle


on the table. Everyone stopped singing; the word went


round, "Sh! Furex is starting!" Furex was a strange


creature, a Limousin stonemason who worked steadily


all the week and drank himself into a kind of paroxysm


on Saturdays. He had lost his memory and could not


remember anything before the war, and he would have


gone to pieces through drink if Madame F. had not taken


care of him. On Saturday evenings at about five o'clock


she would say to someone, "Catch Furex before he


spends his wages," and when he had been caught she


would take away his money, leaving him enough for one


good drink. One week he escaped, and, rolling blind


drunk in the Place Monge, was run over by a car and


badly hurt.



   The queer thing about Furex was that, though he was


a Communist when sober, he turned violently patriotic


when drunk. He started the evening with good


Communist principles, but after four or five litres he


was a rampant Chauvinist, denouncing spies,



challenging all foreigners to fight, and, if he was not


prevented, throwing bottles. It was at this stage that he


made his speech-for he made a patriotic speech every


Saturday night. The speech was always the same, word


for word. It ran:



   "Citizens of the Republic, are there any Frenchmen


here? If there are any Frenchmen here, I rise to remind


them-to remind them in effect, of the glorious days of


the war. When one looks back upon that time of


comradeship and heroism-one looks back, in effect,


upon that time of comradeship and heroism. When one


remembers the heroes who are dead-one remembers, in


effect, the heroes who are dead. Citizens of the


Republic, I was wounded at Verdun


   "



   Here he partially undressed and showed the wound


he had received at Verdun. There were shouts of


applause. We thought nothing in the world could be


funnier than this speech of Furex's. He was a well-


known spectacle in the quarter; people used to come in


from other





bistros to watch him when his fit started.



   The word was passed round to bait Furex. With a


wink to the others someone called for silence, and asked


him to sing the « Marseillaise. » He sang it well, in a fine


bass voice, with patriotic gurgling noises deep down in


his chest when he came to





« Aux arrmes, citoyens! 





Forrmez vos bataillons!


 » Veritable tears rolled down his


cheeks; he was too drunk to see that everyone was


laughing at him. Then, before he had finished, two


strong workmen seized him by either arm and held him


down, while Azaya shouted, "Vine l'Allemagne! » just out


of his reach. Furex's face went purple at such infamy.


Everyone in the bistro began shouting together, "





Vive





l'Allemagne! A bas la France!" 


while Furex struggled to


get at them. But suddenly he spoiled the fun. His face


turned pale and doleful, his limbs went limp, and before


anyone could stop him he was sick on the table. Then Madame


F. hoisted him like a sack and carried him up to bed. In the


morning he reappeared quiet and civil, and bought a copy of





L'Humanit&#233;


.



   The table was wiped with a cloth, Madame F.


brought more litre bottles and loaves of bread, and we


settled down to serious drinking. There were more


songs. An itinerant singer came in with his banjo and


performed for five-sou pieces. An Arab and a girl from


the





bistro down the street did a dance, the man wielding


a painted wooden phallus the size of a rolling-pin.


There were gaps in the noise now. People had begun to


talk about their love-affairs, and the war, and the barbel


fishing in the Seine, and the best way to





faire la





revolution


, and to tell stories. Charlie, grown sober again,


captured the conversation and talked about his soul for


five minutes. The doors and windows were opened to


cool the room. The street was emptying, and in the


distance one could hear the lonely milk train thundering


down the Boulevard St. Michel. The air blew cold on


our foreheads, and the coarse African wine still tasted


good: we were still happy, but meditatively, with the


shouting and hilarious mood finished.



   By one o'clock we were not happy any longer. We


felt the joy of the evening wearing thin, and called


hastily for more bottles, but Madame F. was watering


the wine now, and it did not taste the same. Men grew


quarrelsome. The girls were violently kissed and hands


thrust into their bosoms and they made off lest worse


should happen. Big Louis, the bricklayer, was drunk,


and crawled about the floor barking and pretending to


be a dog. The others grew tired of him and kicked at


him as he went past. People seized each other by the


arm and began long rambling confessions, and were



angry when these were not listened to. The crowd


thinned. Manuel and another man, both gamblers, went


across to the Arab





bistro, where card-playing went on till


daylight. Charlie suddenly borrowed thirty francs from


Madame F. and disappeared, probably to a brothel. Men


began to empty their glasses, call briefly, «





'Sieurs, dames!"


and go off to bed.



   By half-past one the last drop of pleasure had


evaporated, leaving nothing but headaches. We perceived


that we were not splendid inhabitants of a splendid


world, but a crew of underpaid workmen grown squalidly


and dismally drunk. We went on swallowing the wine,


but it was only from habit, and the stuff seemed suddenly


nauseating. One's head had swollen up like a balloon, the


floor rocked, one's tongue and lips were stained purple.


At last it was no use keeping it up any longer. Several


men went out into the yard behind the bistro and were


sick. We crawled up to bed, tumbled down half dressed,


and stayed there ten hours.



   Most of my Saturday nights went in this way. On the


whole, the two hours when one was perfectly and wildly


happy seemed worth the subsequent headache. For


many men in the quarter, unmarried and with no future


to think of, the weekly drinking-bout was the one thing


that made life worth living.





                        XVIII



CHARLIE told us a good story one Saturday night in the





bistro


. Try and picture him-drunk, but sober enough to


talk consecutively. He bangs on the zinc bar and yells for


silence:



   "Silence,





messieurs et dames-silence, I implore you!


Listen to this story, that I am about to tell you. A


memorable story, an instructive story, one of the


souvenirs of a refined and civilised life. Silence,





messieurs





et dames


!



   "It happened at a time when I was hard up. You


know what that is like-how damnable, that a man of


refinement should ever be in such a condition. My


money had not come from home; I had pawned every-


thing, and there was nothing open to me except to


work, which is a thing I will not do. I was living with a


girl at the time-Yvonne her name was-a great half-witted


peasant girl like Azaya there, with yellow hair and fat


legs. The two of us had eaten nothing in three days.





Mon





Dieu


, what sufferings! The girl used to walk up and


down the room with her hands on her belly, howling


like a dog that she was dying of starvation. It was


terrible.



   "But to a man of intelligence nothing is impossible. I


propounded to myself the question, 'What is the easiest


way to get money without working?' And immediately


the answer came: 'To get money easily one must be a


woman. Has not every woman something to sell?' And


then, as I lay reflecting upon the things I should do if I


were a woman, an idea came into my head. I


remembered the Government maternity hospitals-you


know the Government maternity hospitals? They are


places where women who are enceinte are given meals


free and no questions are asked. It is done to encourage


childbearing. Any woman can go there and demand a


meal, and she is given it immediately.



   «





'Mon Dieu!' I thought, 'if only I were a woman! I


would eat at one of those places every day. Who can


tell whether a woman is enceinte or not, without an


examination?' 7



   "I turned to Yvonne. 'Stop that insufferable


bawling.' I said, 'I have thought of a way to get food.'



   " 'How?' said she.



   " 'It is simple,' I said. "Go to the Government


maternity hospital. Tell them you are enceinte and ask for


food. They will give you a good meal and ask no


questions.'



   « Yvonne was appalled.





'Mais, mon Dieu,' she cried, 'I


am not





enceinte!'



   " 'Who cares?' I said. 'That is easily remedied. What


do you need except a cushion-two cushions if


necessary? It is an inspiration from heaven, ma ch&#233;re.


Don't waste it.'



   "Well, in the end I persuaded her, and then we


borrowed a cushion and I got her ready and took her to


the maternity hospital. They received her with open


arms. They gave her cabbage soup, a rago&#251;t of beef, a


pur&#233;e of potatoes, bread and cheese and beer, and all


kinds of advice about her baby. Yvonne gorged till she


almost burst her skin. and mangaed to slip some of the


bread and cheese into her pocket for me. I took her there


every day until I had money again. My intelligence had


saved us.



   "Everything went well until a year later. I was with


Yvonne again, and one day we were walking down the


Boulevard Port Royal, near the barracks. Suddenly


Yvonne's mouth fell open, and she began turning red


and white, and red again.



   "





'Mon Dieu!' she cried, 'look at that who is coming! It


is the nurse who was in charge at the maternity hospital.


I am ruined!'



   " 'Quick!' I said, 'run!' But it was too late. The nurse


had recognised Yvonne, and she came straight up to us,


smiling. She was a big fat woman with a


gold pince-nez and red cheeks like the cheeks of an


apple. A motherly, interfering kind of woman.



   " 'I hope you are well,





ma petite?' she said kindly.


'And your baby, is he well too? Was it a boy, as you


were hoping?'



   « Yvonne had begun trembling so hard that I had to


grip her arm. 'No,' she said at last.



   " 'Ah, then,





evidemment, it was a girl?'



   "Thereupon Yvonne, the idiot, lost her head com-


pletely. 'No,' she actually said again!



   "The nurse was taken aback.





'Comment!' she ex-


claimed, 'neither a boy nor a girl! But how can that be?'



   "Figure to yourselves,





messieurs et dames, it was a


dangerous moment. Yvonne had turned the colour of a


beetroot and she looked ready to burst into tears; another


second and she would have confessed everything.


Heaven knows what might have happened. But as for


me, I had kept my head; I stepped in and saved the


situation.



   " 'It was twins,' I said calmly.



   " 'Twins!' exclaimed the nurse. And she was so


pleased that she took Yvonne by the shoulders and


embraced her on both cheeks, publicly.



   "Yes, twins. . . ."




                      XIX



ONE day, when we had been at the H&#244;tel X. five or six


weeks, Boris disappeared without notice. In the evening


I found him waiting for me in the Rue de Rivoli. He


slapped me gaily on the shoulder.



   "Free at last,





mon ami! You can give notice in the


morning. The Auberge opens to-morrow."



   "Tomorrow?"



   "Well, possibly we shall need a day or two to arrange


things. But, at any rate, no more





cafeterie!





Nous 





sommes lanc&#233;s


, mon ami! My tail coat is out of pawn


already."



   His manner was so hearty that I felt sure there was


something wrong, and I did not at all want to leave my


safe and comfortable job at the hotel. However, I had


promised Boris, so I gave notice, and the next morning at


seven went down to the Auberge de Jehan Cottard. It


was locked, and I went in search of Boris, who had once


more bolted from his lodgings and taken a room in the


Rue de la Croix Nivert. I found him asleep, together with


a girl whom he had picked up the night before, and who


he told me was "of a very sympathetic temperament." As


to the restaurant, he said that it was all arranged; there


were only a few little things to be seen to before we


opened.



   At ten I managed to get Boris out of bed, and we un-


locked the restaurant. At a glance I saw what the "few


little things" amounted to. It was briefly this: that the


alterations had not been touched since our last visit. The


stoves for the kitchen had not arrived, the water and


electricity had not been laid on, and there was all


manner of painting, polishing and carpentering to be


done. Nothing short of a miracle could open the restau-


rant within ten days, and by the look of things it might


collapse without even opening. It was obvious what had


happened. The





patron was short of money, and he had


engaged the staff (there were four of us) in order to use


us instead of workmen. He would be getting our services


almost free, for waiters are paid no wages, and though he


would have to pay me, he would not be feeding me till


the restaurant opened. In effect, he had swindled us of


several hundred francs by sending for us before the


restaurant was open. We had thrown up a good job for


nothing.



   Boris, however, was full of hope. He had only one


idea in his head, namely, that here at last was a chance


of being a waiter and wearing a tail coat once more. For


this he was quite willing to do ten days' work unpaid,


with the chance of being left jobless in the end.


"Patience!" he kept saying. "That will arrange itself. Wait


till the restaurant opens, and we'll get it all back.


Patience,





mon ami! »



   We needed patience, for days passed and the restau-


rant did not even progress towards opening. We cleaned


out the cellars, fixed the shelves, distempered the walls,


polished the woodwork, whitewashed the ceiling, stained


the floor; but the main work, the plumbing and


gasfitting and electricity, was still not done, because the





patron


 could not pay the bills. Evidently he was almost


penniless, for he refused the smallest charges, and he


had a trick of swiftly disappearing when asked for


money. His blend of shiftiness and aristocratic manners


made him very hard to deal with. Melancholy duns came


looking for him at all hours, and by instruction we


always told them that he was at Fontainebleau, or Saint


Cloud, or some other place that was safely distant.


Meanwhile, I was getting hungrier and hungrier. I had


left the hotel with thirty francs, and I had to go back


immediately to a diet of dry bread. Boris had managed


in the beginning to extract an advance of sixty francs


from the





patron, but he had spent half of it, in


redeeming his waiter's clothes, and half on the girl of


sympathetic temperament. He borrowed three francs a


day from Jules, the second waiter, and spent it on


bread. Some days we had not even money for tobacco.



   Sometimes the cook came to see how things were


getting on, and when she saw that the kitchen was still


bare of pots and pans she usually wept. Jules, the


second waiter, refused steadily to help with the work. He


was a Magyar, a little dark, sharp-featured fellow in spec-


tacles, and very talkative; he had been a medical


student, but had abandoned his training for lack of


money. He had a taste for talking while other people


were working, and he told me all about himself and his


ideas. It appeared that he was a Communist, and had


various strange theories (he could prove to you by


figures that it was wrong to work), and he was also,


like most Magyars, passionately proud. Proud and lazy


men do not make good waiters. It was Jules's dearest


boast that once when a customer in a restaurant had


insulted him, he had poured a plate of hot soup down


the customer's neck, and then walked straight out


without even waiting to be sacked.



   As each day went by Jules grew more and more en-


raged at the trick the





patron had played on us. He had a


spluttering, oratorical way of talking. He used to walk


up and down shaking his fist, and trying to incite me


not to work:



   "Put that brush down, you fool! You and I belong to


proud races; we don't work for nothing, like these


damned Russian serfs. I tell you, to be cheated like


this is torture to me. There have been times in my life,


when someone has cheated me even of five sous, when


I have vomited-yes, vomited with rage.



   "Besides,





mon vieux, don't forget that I'm a Commu-


nist. A





bas la bourgeoisie! Did any man alive ever see me


working when I could avoid it? No. And not only I don't


wear myself out working, like you other fools, but I


steal, just to show my independence. Once I was in a


restaurant where the





patron thought he could treat me


like a dog. Well, in revenge I found out a way to steal


milk from the milk-cans and seal them up again so


that no one should know. I tell you I just swilled that


milk down night and morning. Every day I drank four


litres of milk, besides half a litre of cream. The patron


was at his wits' end to know where the milk was going.


It wasn't that I wanted milk, you understand, because I


hate the stuff, it was principle, just principle.



   "Well, after three days I began to get dreadful pains


in my belly, and I went to the doctor. 'What have you


been eating?' he said. I said: 'I drink four litres of milk


a day, and half a litre of cream.' 'Four litres!' he said.


'Then stop it at once. You'll burst if you go on.' 'What


do I care?' I said. 'With me principle is everything. I


shall go on drinking that milk, even if I do burst.'



   "Well, the next day the





patron caught me stealing


milk. 'You're sacked,' he said; 'you leave at the end of


the week.'





'Pardon, monsieur,' I said, 'I shall leave this


morning.' 'No, you won't,' he said, 'I can't spare you till


Saturday.' 'Very well,





mon patron,' I thought to myself,


'we'll see who gets tired of it first.' And then I set to


work to smash the crockery. I broke nine plates the


first day and thirteen the second; after that the





patron


was glad to see the last of me.



   « Ah, I'm not one of your Russian





moujiks . . ."



   Ten days passed. It was a bad time. I was absolutely at


the end of my money, and my rent was several days


overdue. We loafed about the dismal empty restaurant,


too hungry even to get on with the work that remained.


Only Boris now believed that the restaurant would


open. He had set his heart on being





maitre d'h&#244;tel, and


he invented a theory that the





patron's money was tied


up in shares and he was waiting a favourable moment


for selling. On the tenth day I had nothing to eat or


smoke, and I told the





patron that I could not continue


working without an advance on my wages. As blandly


as usual, the





patron promised the advance, and then,


according to his custom, vanished. I walked part of


the way home, but I did not feel equal to a scene with


Madame F. over the rent, so I passed the night on a


bench on the boulevard. It was very uncomfortable-the


arm of the seat cuts into your back-and much colder


than I had expected. There was plenty of time, in the


long boring hours between dawn and work, to think


what a fool I had been to deliver myself into the hands


of these Russians.



   Then, in the morning, the luck changed. Evidently


the





patron had come to an understanding with his


creditors, for he arrived with money in his pockets, set


the alterations going, and gave me my advance. Boris


and I bought macaroni and a piece of horse's liver, and


had our first hot meal in ten days.



   The workmen were brought in and the alterations


made, hastily and with incredible shoddiness. The


tables, for instance, were to be covered with baize, but


when the





patron found that baize was expensive he


bought instead disused army blankets, smelling incor-


rigibly of sweat. The table-cloths (they were check, to go


with the "Norman" decorations) would cover them, of


course. On the last night we were at work till two in the


morning, getting things ready. The crockery did not


arrive till eight, and, being new, had all to be washed.


The cutlery did not arrive till the next morning, nor the


linen either, so that we had to dry the crockery with a


shirt of the





patron's and an old pillowslip belonging to


the concierge. Boris and I did all the work. Jules was


skulking, and the





patron and his wife sat in the bar with


a dun and some Russian friends, drinking success to


the restaurant. The cook was in the kitchen with her


head on the table, crying, because she was expected to


cook for fifty people, and there were not pots and pans


enough for ten. About midnight there was a fearful


interview with some duns, who came intending to


seize eight copper saucepans which the





patron had


obtained on credit. They were bought off with half a


bottle of brandy.



   Jules and I missed the last Metro home and had to


sleep on the floor of the restaurant. The first thing we


saw in the morning were two large rats sitting on the


kitchen table, eating from a ham that stood there. It


seemed a bad omen, and I was surer than ever that the


Auberge de Jehan Cottard would turn out a failure.




                         XX



THE





patron had engaged me as kitchen





plongeur; that is,


my job was to wash up, keep the kitchen clean, prepare


vegetables, make tea, coffee and sandwiches, do the


simpler cooking, and run errands. The terms were, as


usual, five hundred francs a month and food, but I had


no free day and no fixed working hours. At the H&#244;tel X. I


had seen catering at its best, with unlimited money and


good organisation. Now, at the Auberge, I learned how


things are done in a thoroughly bad restaurant. It is


worth describing, for there are hundreds of similar


restaurants in Paris, and every visitor feeds in one of


them occasionally.



   I should add, by the way, that the Auberge was not


the ordinary cheap eating-house frequented by students


and workmen. We did not provide an adequate meal at


less than twenty-five francs, and we were picturesque


and artistic, which sent up our social standing. There


were the indecent pictures in the bar, and the Norman


decorations-sham beams on the walls, electric lights


done up as candlesticks, "peasant" pottery, even a


mounting-block at the door-and the





patron and the head


waiter were Russian officers, and many of the



customers titled Russian refugees. In short, we were


decidedly chic.



   Nevertheless, the conditions behind the kitchen door


were suitable for a pigsty. For this is what our service


arrangements were like.



   The kitchen measured fifteen feet long by eight


broad, and half this space was taken up by the stoves


and tables. All the pots had to be kept on shelves out of


reach, and there was only room for one dustbin. This


dustbin used to be crammed full by midday, and the


floor was normally an inch deep in a compost of


trampled food.



   For firing we had nothing but three gas-stoves,


without ovens, and all joints had to be sent out to the


bakery.



   There was no larder. Our substitute for one was a


half-roofed shed in the yard, with a tree growing in the


middle of it. The meat, vegetables and so forth lay there


on the bare earth, raided by rats and cats.



   There was no hot water laid on. Water for washing up


had to be heated in pans, and, as there was no room for


these on the stoves when meals were cooking, most of


the plates had to be washed in cold water. This, with


soft soap and the hard Paris water, meant scraping the


grease off with bits of newspaper.



   We were so short of saucepans that I had to wash


each one as soon as it was done with, instead of leaving


them till the evening. This alone wasted probably an


hour a day.



   Owing to some scamping of expense in the installa-


tion, the electric light usually fused at eight in the


evening. The patron would only allow us three candles


in the kitchen, and the cook said three were unlucky, so


we had only two.



   Our coffee-grinder was borrowed from a





bistro near


by, and our dustbin and brooms from the concierge.


After the first week a quantity of linen did not come back


from the wash, as the bill was not paid. We were in


trouble with the inspector of labour, who had discovered


that the staff included no Frenchmen; he had several


private interviews with the





patron, who, I believe, was


obliged to bribe him. The electric company was still


dunning us, and when the duns found that we would


buy them off with





ap&#233;ritifs, they came every morning. We


were in debt at the grocery, and credit would have been


stopped, only the grocer's wife (a moustachio'd woman of


sixty) had taken a fancy to Jules, who was sent every


morning to cajole her. Similarly I had to waste an hour


every day haggling over vegetables in the Rue du


Commerce, to save a few centimes.



   These are the results of starting a restaurant on in-


sufficient capital. And in these conditions the cook and I


were expected to serve thirty or forty meals a day, and


would later on be serving a hundred. From the first day


it was too much for us. The cook's working hours were


from eight in the morning till midnight, and mine from


seven in the morning till half-past twelve the next


morning-seventeen and a half hours, almost without a


break. We never had time to sit down till five in the


afternoon, and even then there was no seat except the


top of the dustbin. Boris, who lived near by and had not


to catch the last Metro home, worked from eight in the


morning till two the next morning-eighteen hours a day,


seven days a week. Such hours, though not usual, are


nothing extraordinary in Paris.



   Life settled at once into a routine that made the H&#244;tel


X. seem like a holiday. Every morning at six I drove


myself out of bed, did not shave, sometimes washed,


hurried up to the Place d'Italie and fought for



a place on the Metro. By seven I was in the desolation of


the cold, filthy kitchen, with the potato skins and bones




and fishtails littered on the floor, and a pile of plates,


stuck together in their grease, waiting from overnight. I


could not start on the plates yet, because the water was


cold, and I had to fetch milk and make coffee, for the


others arrived at eight and expected to find coffee ready.


Also, there were always several copper saucepans to


clean. Those copper saucepans are the bane of a





plongeur's 


life. They have to be scoured with sand and


bunches of chain, ten minutes to each one, and then


polished on the outside with Brasso. Fortunately, the art


of making them has been lost and they are gradually


vanishing from French kitchens, though one can still


buy them second-hand.



   When I had begun on the plates the cook would take


me away from the plates to begin skinning onions, and


when I had begun on the onions the





patron would arrive


and send me out to buy cabbages. When I came back


with the cabbages the





patron's wife would tell me to go to


some shop half a mile away and buy a pot of rouge; by


the time I came back there would be more vegetables


waiting, and the plates were still not done. In this way


our incompetence piled one job on another throughout


the day, everything in arrears.



   Till ten, things went comparatively easily, though we


were working fast, and no one lost his temper. The cook


would find time to talk about her artistic nature, and say


did I not think Tolstoi was





&#233;patant, and sing in a fine


soprano voice as she minced beef on the board. But at


ten the waiters began clamouring for their lunch, which


they had early, and at eleven the first customers would


be arriving. Suddenly everything became hurry and bad


temper. There was not the same furious rushing and


yelling as at the H&#244;tel X., but an atmosphere of


muddle, petty spite and exasperation. Discomfort was at


the bottom of it. It was unbearably cramped in the


kitchen, and dishes had to be put on the floor, and one


had to be thinking constantly about not stepping on


them. The cook's vast buttocks banged against me as she


moved to and fro. A ceaseless, nagging chorus of orders


streamed from her:



   "Unspeakable idiot! How many times have I told you


not to bleed the beetroots? Quick, let me get to the sink!


Put those knives away; get on with the potatoes. What


have you done with my strainer? Oh, leave those


potatoes alone. Didn't I tell you to skim the





bouillon? Take


that can of water off the stove. Never mind the washing


up, chop this celery. No, not like that, you fool, like this.


There! Look at you letting those peas boil over! Now get


to work and scale these herrings. Look, do you call this


plate clean? Wipe it on your apron. Put that salad on the


floor. That's right, put it where I'm bound to step in it!


Look out, that pot's boiling over! Get me down that


saucepan. No, the other one. Put this on the grill. Throw


those potatoes away. Don't waste time, throw them on


the floor. Tread them in.' Now throw down some sawdust;


this floor's like a skating-rink. Look, you fool, that


steak's burning!





Mon Dieu, why did they send me an idiot


for a





plongeur? Who are you talking to? Do you realise that


my aunt was a Russian countess?" etc. etc. etc.



   This went on till three o'clock without much variation,


except that about eleven the cook usually had a





crise de





nerfs


 and a flood of tears. From three to five was a fairly


slack time for the waiters, but the cook was still busy,


and I was working my fastest, for there was a pile of dirty


plates waiting, and it was a race to get them done, or


partly done, before dinner began. The washing up was


doubled by the primitive conditions-


a cramped draining-board, tepid water, sodden cloths,


and a sink that got blocked once in an hour. By five the


cook and I were feeling unsteady on our feet, not having


eaten or sat down since seven. We used to collapse, she


on the dustbin and I on the floor, drink a bottle of beer,


and apologise for some of the things we had said in the


morning. Tea was what kept us going. We took care to


have a pot always stewing, and drank pints during the


day.



   At half-past five the hurry and quarrelling began


again, and now worse than before, because everyone was


tired out. The cook had a





crise de nerfs at six and another


at nine; they came on so regularly that one could have


told the time by them. She would flop down on the


dustbin, begin weeping hysterically, and cry out that


never, no, never had she thought to come to such a life as


this; her nerves would not stand it; she had studied


music at Vienna; she had a bedridden husband to


support, etc. etc. At another time one would have been


sorry for her, but, tired as we all were, her whimpering


voice merely infuriated us. Jules used. to stand in the


doorway and mimic her weeping. The





patron's wife nagged,


and Boris and Jules quarrelled all day, because Jules


shirked his work, and Boris, as head waiter, claimed the


larger share of the tips. Only the second day after the


restaurant opened, they came to blows in the kitchen over


a two-franc tip, and the cook and I had to separate them.


The only person who never forgot his manners was the





patron


. He kept the same hours as the rest of us, but he


had no work to do, for it was his wife who really managed


things. His sole job, besides ordering the supplies, was to


stand in the bar smoking cigarettes and looking


gentlemanly, and he did that to perfection.



   The cook and I generally found time to eat our


dinner between ten and eleven o'clock. At midnight the


cook would steal a packet of food for her husband, stow


it under her clothes, and make off, whimpering that


these hours would kill her and she would give notice in


the morning. Jules also left at midnight, usually after a


dispute with Boris, who had to look after the bar till two.


Between twelve and half-past I did what I could to finish


the washing up. There was no time to attempt doing the


work properly, and I used simply to rub the grease off


the plates with tablenapkins. As for the dirt on the floor,


I let it lie, or swept the worst of it out of sight under the


stoves.



   At half-past twelve I would put on my coat and hurry


out. The





patron, bland as ever, would stop me as I went


down the alley-way past the bar. «





Mais, mon cher 





monsieur


, how tired you look! Please do me the favour of


accepting this glass of brandy."



   He would hand me the glass of brandy as courteously


as though I had been a Russian duke instead of a


plongeur. He treated all of us like this. It was our com-


pensation for working seventeen hours a day.



  As a rule the last Metro was almost empty-a great


advantage, for one could sit down and sleep for a


quarter of an hour. Generally I was in bed by halfpast


one. Sometimes I missed the train and had to sleep on


the floor of the restaurant, but it hardly mattered, for I


could have slept on cobblestones at that time.




                     XXI



THIS life went on for about a fortnight, with a slight


increase of work as more customers came to the restaur-


ant. I could have saved an hour a day by taking a


room near the restaurant, but it seemed impossible to


find time to change lodgings-or, for that matter, to get


my hair cut, look at a newspaper, or even undress


completely. After ten days I managed to find a free


quarter of an hour, and wrote to my friend B. in London


asking him if he could get me a job of some sort-


anything, so long as it allowed more than five hours


sleep. I was simply not equal to going on with a


seventeen-hour day, though there are plenty of people


who think nothing of it. When one is overworked, it is a


good cure for self-pity to think of the thousands of


people in Paris restaurants who work such hours, and


will go on doing it, not for a few weeks, but for years.


There was a girl in a





bistro near my hotel who worked


from seven in the morning till midnight for a whole year,


only sitting down to her meals. I remember once asking


her to come to a dance, and she laughed and said that


she had not been further than the street corner for


several months. She was consumptive, and died about


the time I left Paris.



   After only a week we were all neurasthenic with


fatigue, except Jules, who skulked persistently. The


quarrels, intermittent at first, had now become con-


tinuous. For hours one would keep up a drizzle of


useless nagging, rising into storms of abuse every few


minutes. "Get me down that saucepan, idiot!' the cook


would cry (she was not tall enough to reach the shelves


where the saucepans were kept). "Get it down yourself,


you old whore," I would answer. Such remarks seemed to


be generated spontaneously from the air of the kitchen.



   We quarrelled over things of inconceivable pettiness.


The dustbin, for instance, was an unending source of


quarrels-whether it should be put where I wanted it,


which was in the cook's way, or where she wanted it,


which was between me and the sink. Once she nagged


and nagged until at last, in pure spite, I lifted the


dustbin up and put it out in the middle of the floor,


where she was bound to trip over it.



   "Now, you cow," I said, "move it yourself."



   Poor old woman, it was too heavy for her to lift, and


she sat down, put her head on the table and burst out


crying. And I jeered at her. This is the kind of effect that


fatigue has upon one's manners.



   After a few days the cook had ceased talking about


Tolstoi and her artistic nature, and she and I were not


on speaking terms, except for the purposes of work, and


Boris and Jules were not on speaking terms, and neither


of them was on speaking terms with the cook. Even


Boris and I were barely on speaking terms. We had


agreed beforehand that the





engueulades of working hours


did not count between times; but we had called each


other things too bad to be forgotten-and besides, there


were no between times. Jules grew lazier and lazier, and


he stole food constantly-from a sense of duty, he said.


He called the rest of us





jaune-blackleg-when we would


not join with him in stealing. He had a curious,


malignant spirit. He told me, as a matter of pride, that


he had sometimes wrung a dirty dishcloth into a


customer's soup before taking it in, just to be revenged


upon a member of the bourgeoisie.



   The kitchen grew dirtier and the rats bolder, though


we trapped a few of them. Looking round that filthy


room, with raw meat lying among refuse on the floor,


and cold, clotted saucepans sprawling everywhere, and


the sink blocked and coated with grease, I used to


wonder whether there could be a restaurant in the world


as bad as ours. But the other three all said that they


had been in dirtier places. Jules took a positive pleasure


in seeings things dirty. In the afternoon, when 8



he had not much to do, he used to stand in the kitchen


doorway jeering at us for working too hard:



   "Fool! Why do you wash that plate? Wipe it on your


trousers. Who cares about the customers?





They don't


know what's going on. What is restaurant work? You


are carving a chicken and it falls on the floor. You


apologise, you bow, you go out; and in five minutes you


come back by another door-with the same chicken. That


is restaurant work," etc.



   And, strange to say, in spite of all this filth and in-


competence, the Auberge de Jehan Cottard was actually


a success. For the first few days all our customers were


Russians, friends of the





patron, and these were followed


by Americans and other foreigners-no Frenchmen.


Then one night there was tremendous excitement,


because our first Frenchman had arrived. For a moment


our quarrels were forgotten and we all united in the


effort to serve a good dinner. Boris tiptoed into the


kitchen, jerked his thumb over his shoulder and


whispered conspiratorially:



   "





Sh! Attention, un Fran&#231;ais! »



   A moment later the patron's wife came and


whispered:



   "





Attention, un Fran&#231;ais! See that he gets a double


portion of all vegetables."



   While the Frenchman ate, the





patron's wife stood


behind the grille of the kitchen door and watched the


expression of his face. Next night the Frenchman came


back with two other Frenchmen. This meant that we


were earning a good name; the surest sign of a bad


restaurant is to be frequented only by foreigners. Pro-


bably part of the reason for our success was that the


patron, with the sole gleam of sense he had shown in


fitting out the restaurant, had bought very sharp table-


knives. Sharp knives, of course, are the secret of a


successful restaurant. I am glad that this happened, for


it destroyed one of my illusions, namely, the idea that


Frenchmen know good food when they see it. Or


perhaps we were a fairly good restaurant by Paris


standards; in which case the bad ones must be past


imagining.



   In a very few days after I had written to B. he replied


to say that there was a job he could get for me. It was to


look after a congenital imbecile, which sounded a


splendid rest cure after the Auberge de Jehan Cottard. I


pictured myself loafing in the country lanes, knocking


thistle-heads off with my stick, feeding on roast lamb and


treacle tart, and sleeping ten hours a night in sheets


smelling of lavender. B. sent me a fiver to pay my


passage and get my clothes out of the pawn, and as soon


as the money arrived I gave one day's notice and left the


restaurant. My leaving so suddenly embarrassed the





patron,


 for as usual he was penniless, and he had to pay


my wages thirty francs short. However he stood me a


glass of Courvoisier '48 brandy, and I think he felt that


this made up the difference. They engaged a Czech, a


thoroughly competent





plongeur, in my place, and the poor


old cook was sacked a few weeks later. Afterwards I


heard that, with two first-rate people in the kitchen, the





plongeur's


 work had been cut down to fifteen hours a day.


Below that no one could have cut it, short of


modernising the kitchen.




                     XXII



FOR what they are worth I want to give my opinions


about the life of a Paris





plongeur. When one comes to


think of it, it is strange that thousands of people in a


great modern city should spend their waking hours


swabbing dishes in hot dens underground. The


question I am raising is why this life goes on-what


purpose it serves, and who wants it to continue, and why.


I am not taking the merely rebellious,





fain&#233;ant attitude. I


am trying to consider the social significance of a





plongeur's


life.



   I think one should start by saying that a





plongeur is


one of the slaves of the modern world. Not that there is


any need to whine over him, for he is better off than


many manual workers, but still, he is no freer than if he


were bought and sold. His work is servile and without


art; he is paid just enough to keep him alive; his only


holiday is the sack. He is cut off from marriage, or, if he


marries, his wife must work too. Except by a lucky


chance, he has no escape from this life, save into prison.


At this moment there are men with university degrees


scrubbing dishes in Paris for ten or fifteen hours a day.


One cannot say that it is mere idleness on their part, for


an idle man cannot be a





plongeur; they have simply been


trapped by a routine which makes thought impossible. If





plongeurs 


thought at all, they would long ago have formed


a union and gone on strike for better treatment. But


they do not think, because they have no leisure for it;


their life has made slaves of them.



   The question is, why does this slavery continue?


People have a way of taking it for granted that all work


is done for a sound purpose. They see somebody else


doing a disagreeable job, and think that they have


solved things by saying that the job is necessary. Coal-


mining, for example, is hard work, but it is necessary-we


must have coal. Working in the sewers is unpleasant,


but somebody must work in the sewers. And similarly


with a





plongeur's work. Some people must feed in


restaurants, and so other people must swab dishes for


eighty hours a week. It is the work of civilisation,


therefore unquestionable. This point is worth


considering.



   Is a





plongeur's work really necessary to civilisation?


We have a feeling that it must be "honest" work,


because it is hard and disagreeable, and we have made


a sort of fetish of manual work. We see a man cutting


down a tree, and we make sure that he is filling a social


need, just because he uses his muscles; it does not


occur to us that he may only be cutting down a


beautiful tree to make room for a hideous statue. I


believe it is the same with a





plongeur. He earns his bread


in the sweat of his brow, but it does not follow that he is


doing anything useful; he may be only supplying a


luxury which, very often, is not a luxury.



   As an example of what I mean by luxuries which are


not luxuries, take an extreme case, such as one hardly


sees in Europe. Take an Indian rickshaw puller, or a


gharry pony. In any Far Eastern town there are


rickshaw pullers by the hundred, black wretches


weighing eight stone, clad in loin-cloths. Some of them


are diseased; some of them are fifty years old. For miles


on end they trot in the sun or rain, head down, dragging


at the shafts, with the sweat dripping from their grey


moustaches. When they go too slowly the passenger


calls them





bahinchut. They earn thirty or forty rupees a


month, and cough their lungs out after a few years. The


gharry ponies are gaunt, vicious things that have been


sold cheap as having a few years' work left in them.


Their master looks on the whip as a substitute for food.


Their work expresses itself in a sort of equation-whip


plus food equals energy; generally it is about sixty per


cent. whip and forty per cent. food. Sometimes their


necks are encircled by one vast sore, so that they drag


all day on raw flesh. It is still possible to make them


work, however; it is just a question of thrashing them so


hard that the pain behind outweighs the pain in front.


After a few years even the whip loses its virtue, and the


pony goes to the knacker. These are instances of un-


necessary work, for there is no real need for gharries


and rickshaws; they only exist because Orientals con-


sider it vulgar to walk. They are luxuries, and, as any-


one who has ridden in them knows, very poor luxuries.


They afford a small amount of convenience, which


cannot possibly balance the suffering of the men and


animals.



   Similarly with the





plongeur. He is a king compared


with a rickshaw puller or a gharry pony, but his case is


analogous. He is the slave of a hotel or a restaurant,


and his slavery is more or less useless. For, after all,


where is the real need of big hotels and smart


restaurants? They are supposed to provide luxury, but


in reality they provide only a cheap, shoddy imitation of


it. Nearly everyone hates hotels. Some restaurants are


better than others, but it is impossible to get as good a


meal in a restaurant as one can get, for the same ex-


pense, in a private house. No doubt hotels and restau-


rants must exist, but there is no need that they should


enslave hundreds of people. What makes the work in


them is not the essentials; it is the shams that are sup-


posed to represent luxury. Smartness, as it is called,


means, in effect, merely that the staff work more and


the customers pay more; no one benefits except the


proprietor, who will presently buy himself a striped villa


at Deauville. Essentially, a "smart" hotel is a place


where a hundred people toil like devils in order that two


hundred may pay through the nose for things they do


not really want. If the nonsense were cut out of hotels


and restaurants, and the work done with simple


efficiency,





plongeurs might work six or eight hours a day


instead of ten or fifteen.



   Suppose it is granted that a





plongeur's work is more


or less useless. Then the question follows, Why does any


one want him to go on working? I am trying to go beyond


the immediate economic cause, and to consider what


pleasure it can give anyone to think of men swabbing


dishes for life. For there is no doubt that people-


comfortably situated people-do find a pleasure in such


thoughts. A slave, Marcus Cato said, should be working


when he is not sleeping. It does not matter whether his


work is needed or not, he must work, because work in


itself is good-for slaves, at least. This sentiment still


survives, and it has piled up mountains of useless


drudgery.



   I believe that this instinct to perpetuate useless work


is, at bottom, simply fear of the mob. The mob (the


thought runs) are such low animals that they would be


dangerous if they had leisure; it is safer to keep them


too busy to think. A rich man who happens to be


intellectually honest, if he is questioned about the


improvement of working conditions, usually says some-


thing like this:



   "We know that poverty is unpleasant; in fact, since it


is so remote, we rather enjoy harrowing ourselves with


the thought of its unpleasantness. But don't expect us


to do anything about it. We are sorry for you lower


classes, just as we are sorry for a cat with the mange,


but we will fight like devils against any improvement of


your condition. We feel that you are much safer as you


are. The present state of affairs suits us, and we are not


going to take the risk of setting you free, even by an


extra hour a day. So, dear brothers, since evidently you


must sweat to pay for our trips to Italy, sweat and be


damned to you."



   This is particularly the attitude of intelligent,


cultivated people; one can read the substance of it in a


hundred essays. Very few cultivated people have less


than (say) four hundred pounds a year, and naturally



they side with the rich, because they imagine that any


liberty conceded to the poor is a threat to their own


liberty. Foreseeing some dismal Marxian Utopia as the


alternative, the educated man prefers to keep things as


they are. Possibly he does not like his fellow-rich very


much, but he supposes that even the vulgarest of them


are less inimical to his pleasures, more his kind of


people, than the poor, and that he had better stand by


them. It is this fear of a supposedly dangerous mob that


makes nearly all intelligent people conservative in their


opinions.



   Fear of the mob is a superstitious fear. It is based on


the idea that there is some mysterious, fundamental


difference between rich and poor, as though they were


two different races, like negroes and white men. But in


reality there is no such difference. The mass of the rich


and the poor are differentiated by their incomes and


nothing else, and the average millionaire is only the


average dishwasher dressed in a new suit. Change


places, and handy dandy, which is the justice, which is


the thief? Everyone who has mixed on equal terms with


the poor knows this quite well. But the trouble is that


intelligent, cultivated people, the very people who might


be expected to have liberal opinions, never do mix with


the poor. For what do the majority of educated people


know about poverty? In my copy of Villon's poems the


editor has actually thought it necessary to explain the


line «





Ne pain ne voyent qu'aux fenestres" by a footnote; so


remote is even hunger from the educated man's


experience. From this ignorance a superstitious fear of


the mob results quite naturally. The educated man


pictures a horde of submen, wanting only a day's liberty


to loot his house, burn his books, and set him to work


minding a machine or sweeping out a lavatory.


"Anything," he thinks, "any injustice,


sooner than let that mob loose." He does not see that


since there is no difference between the mass of rich and


poor, there is no question of setting the mob loose. The


mob is in fact loose now, and-in the shape of rich men-is


using its power to set up enormous treadmills of


boredom, such as "smart" hotels.



   To sum up. A





plongeur is a slave, and a wasted slave,


doing stupid and largely unnecessary work. He is kept at


work, ultimately, because of a vague feeling that he


would be dangerous if he had leisure. And educated


people, who should be on his side, acquiesce in the


process, because they know nothing about him and


consequently are afraid of him. I say this of the





plongeur


because it is his case I have been considering; it would


apply equally to numberless other types of worker. These


are only my own ideas about the basic facts of a





plongeur's


life, made without reference to immediate economic


questions, and no doubt largely platitudes. I present


them as a sample of the thoughts that are put into one's


head by working in a hotel.




                          XXIII



As soon as I left the Auberge de Jehan Cottard I went to


bed and slept the clock round, all but one hour. Then I


washed my teeth for the first time in a fortnight, bathed


and had my hair cut, and got my clothes out of pawn. I


had two glorious days of loafing. I even went in my best


suit to the Auberge, leant against the bar and spent five


francs on a bottle of English beer. It is a curious


sensation, being a customer where you have been a slave's


slave. Boris was sorry that I had left the restaurant just at


the moment when we were lanc&#233;s and there was a. chance


of making money. I have heard


from him since, and he tells me that he is making a


hundred francs a day and has set up a girl who is tr&#233;s


serieuse and never smells of garlic.



   I spent a day wandering about our quarter, saying


good-bye to everyone. It was on this day that Charlie


told me about the death of old Roucolle the miser, who


had once lived in the quarter. Very likely Charlie was


lying as usual, but it was a good story.



   Roucolle died, aged seventy-four, a year or two


before I went to Paris, but the people in the quarter still


talked of him while I was there. He never equalled


Daniel Dancer or anyone of that kind, but he was an


interesting character. He went to Les Halles every


morning to pick up damaged vegetables, and ate cat's


meat, and wore newspaper instead of underclothes, and


used the wainscoting of his room for firewood, and


made himself a pair of trousers out of a sack-all this


with half a million francs invested. I should like very


much to have known him.



   Like many misers, Roucolle came to a bad end


through putting his money into a wildcat scheme. One


day a Jew appeared in the quarter, an alert, businesslike


young chap who had a first-rate plan for smuggling


cocaine into England. It is easy enough, of course, to buy


cocaine in Paris, and the smuggling would be quite


simple in itself, only there is always some spy who


betrays the plan to the customs or the police. It is said


that this is often done by the very people who sell the


cocaine, because the smuggling trade is in the hands of a


large combine, who do not want competition. The Jew,


however, swore that there was no danger. He knew a way


of getting cocaine direct from Vienna, not through the


usual channels, and there would be no blackmail to pay.


He had got into touch with Roucolle through a young


Pole, a student at the Sorbonne, who


was going to put four thousand francs into the scheme if


Roucolle would put six thousand. For this they could buy


ten pounds of cocaine, which would be worth a small


fortune in England.



   The Pole and the Jew had a tremendous struggle to


get the money from between old Roucolle's claws. Six


thousand francs was not much-he had more than that


sewn into the mattress in his room-but it was agony for


him to part with a sou. The Pole and the Jew were at him


for weeks on end, explaining, bullying, coaxing, arguing,


going down on their knees and imploring him to produce


the money. The old man was half frantic between greed


and fear. His bowels yearned at the thought of getting,


perhaps, fifty thousand francs' profit, and yet he could


not bring himself to risk the money. He used to sit in a


corner with his head in his hands, groaning and


sometimes yelling out in agony, and often he would kneel


down (he was very pious) and pray for strength, but still


he couldn't do it. But at last, more from exhaustion than


anything else, he gave in quite suddenly; he slit open the


mattress where his money was concealed and handed


over six thousand francs to the Jew.



   The Jew delivered the cocaine the same day, and


promptly vanished. And meanwhile, as was not sur-


prising after the fuss Roucolle had made, the affair had


been noised all over the quarter. The very next morning


the hotel was raided and searched by the police.



   Roucolle and the Pole were in agonies. The police were


downstairs, working their way up and searching every


room in turn, and there was the great packet of cocaine


on the table, with no place to hide it and no chance of


escaping down the stairs. The Pole was for throwing the


stuff out of the window, but Roucolle


would not hear of it. Charlie told me that he had been


present at the scene. He said that when they tried to


take the packet from Roucolle he clasped it to his


breast and struggled like a madman, although he was


seventy-four years old. He was wild with fright, but he


would go to prison rather than throw his money away.



   At last, when the police were searching only one floor


below, somebody had an idea. A man on Roucolle's floor


had a dozen tins of face-powder which he was selling on


commission; it was suggested that the cocaine could be


put into the tins and passed off as face-powder. The


powder was hastily thrown out of the window and the


cocaine substituted, and the tins were put openly on


Roucolle's table, as though there there were nothing to


conceal. A few minutes later the police came to search


Roucolle's room. They tapped the walls and looked up the


chimney and turned out the drawers and examined the


floorboards, and then, just as they were about to give it


up, having found nothing, the inspector noticed the tins


on the table.



   "





Tiens," he said, "have a look at those tins. I hadn't


noticed them. What's in them, eh?"



   "Face-powder," said the Pole as calmly as he could


manage. But at the same instant Roucolle let out a loud


groaning noise, from alarm, and the police became


suspicious immediately. They opened one of the tins and


tipped out the contents, and after smelling it, the


inspector said that he believed it was cocaine. Roucolle


and the Pole began swearing on the names of the saints


that it was only face-powder; but it was no use, the more


they protested the more suspicious the police became.


The two men were arrested and led off to the police


station, followed by half the quarter.



   At the station, Roucolle and the Pole were inter


rogated by the Commissaire while a tin of the cocaine


was sent away to be analysed. Charlie said that the


scene Roucolle made was beyond description. He wept,


prayed, made contradictory statements and denounced


the Pole all at once, so loud that he could be heard half


a street away. The policemen almost burst with


laughing at him.



   After an hour a policeman came back with the tin of


cocaine and a note from the analyst. He was laughing.



   "This is not cocaine, monsieur," he said.



   "What, not cocaine?" said the Commissaire. "





Mais,





alors


-what is it, then?"



   "It is face-powder."



   Roucolle and the Pole were released at once, entirely


exonerated but very angry. The Jew had doublecrossed


them. Afterwards, when the excitement was over, it


turned out that he had played the same trick on two


other people in the quarter.



   The Pole was glad enough to escape, even though he


had lost his four thousand francs, but poor old


Roucolle was utterly broken down. He took to his bed at


once, and all that day and half the night they could


hear him thrashing about, mumbling, and sometimes


yelling out at the top of his voice:



   "Six thousand francs!





Nom de Jesus-Christ! Six


thousand francs!"



   Three days later he had some kind of stroke, and in


a fortnight he was dead-of a broken heart, Charlie said.




                     XXIV



I TRAVELLED to England third class via Dunkirk and


Tilbury, which is the cheapest and not the worst way of


crossing the Channel. You had to pay extra for


a cabin, so I slept in the saloon, together with most of


the third-class passengers. I find this entry in my diary


for that day:



   "Sleeping in the saloon, twenty-seven men, sixteen


women. Of the women, not a single one has washed her


face this morning. The men mostly went to the bathroom;


the women merely produced vanity cases and covered the


dirt with powder.





Q,. A secondary sexual difference?"




  On the journey I fell in with a couple of Roumanians,


mere children, who were going to England on their


honeymoon trip. They asked innumerable questions


about England, and I told them some startling lies. I was


so pleased to be getting home, after being hard up for


months in a foreign city, that England seemed to me a


sort of Paradise. There are, indeed, many things in


England that make you glad to get home; bathrooms,


armchairs, mint sauce, new potatoes properly cooked,


brown bread, marmalade, beer made with veritable hops-


they are all splendid, if you can pay for them. England is


a very good country when you are not poor; and, of


course, with a tame imbecile to look after, I was not


going to be poor. The thought of not being poor made me


very patriotic. The more questions the Roumanians


asked, the more I praised England; the climate, the


scenery, the art, the literature, the laws-everything in


England was perfect.



   Was the architecture in England good? the Rou-


manians asked. "Splendid!" I said. "And you should just


see the London statues! Paris is vulgar-half grandiosity


and half slums. But London-"



   Then the boat drew alongside Tilbury pier. The first


building we saw on the waterside was one of those huge


hotels, all stucco and pinnacles, which stare from the


English coast like idiots staring over an asylum


wall. I saw the Roumanians, too polite to say anything,


cocking their eyes at the hotel. "Built by French


architects," I assured them; and even later, when the


train was crawling into London through the eastern


slums, I still kept it up about the beauties of English


architecture. Nothing seemed too good to say about


England, now that I was coming home and was not hard


up any more.



   I went to B.'s office, and his first words knocked


everything to ruins. "I'm sorry," he said; "your employers


have gone abroad, patient and all. However, they'll be


back in a month. I suppose you can hang on till then?"



   I was outside in the street before it even occurred to


me to borrow some more money. There was a month to


wait, and I had exactly nineteen and sixpence in hand.


The news had taken my breath away. For a long time I


could not make up my mind what to do. I loafed the day


in the streets, and at night, not having the slightest


notion of how to get a cheap bed in London, I went to a


"family" hotel, where the charge was seven and sixpence.


After paying the bill I had ten and twopence in hand.



   By the morning I had made my plans. Sooner or later


I should have to go to B. for more money, but it seemed


hardly decent to do so yet, and in the meantime I must


exist in some hole-and-corner way. Past experience set


me against pawning my best suit. I would leave all my


things at the station cloakroom, except my second-best


suit, which I could exchange for some cheap clothes and


perhaps a pound. If I was going to live a month on thirty


shillings I must have bad clothes-indeed, the worse the


better. Whether thirty shillings could be made to last a


month I had no idea, not knowing London as I knew


Paris. Perhaps I could beg, or sell bootlaces, and I


remembered articles I had read in the Sunday papers about


beggars who have two thousand pounds sewn into their


trousers. It was, at any rate, notoriously impossible to


starve in London, so there was nothing to be anxious about.



   To sell my clothes I went down into Lambeth, where


the people are poor and there are a lot of rag shops. At


the first shop I tried the proprietor was polite but


unhelpful; at the second he was rude; at the third he


was stone deaf, or pretended to be so. The fourth


shopman was a large blond young man, very pink all


over, like a slice of ham. He looked at the clothes I was


wearing and felt them disparagingly between thumb and


finger.



   "Poor stuff," he said, "very poor stuff, that is." (It was


quite a good suit.) "What yer want for 'em?"



   I explained that I wanted some older clothes and as


much money as he could spare. He thought for a moment,


then collected some dirty-looking rags and threw them on


to the counter. "What about the money?" I said, hoping for


a pound. He pursed his lips, then produced a





shilling and


laid it beside the clothes. I did not argue-I was going to


argue, but as I opened my mouth he reached out as


though to take up the shilling again; I saw that I was


helpless. He let me change in a small room behind the


shop.



   The clothes were a coat, once dark brown, a pair of


black dungaree trousers, a scarf and a cloth cap; I had


kept my own shirt, socks and boots, and I had a comb and


razor in my pocket. It gives one a very strange feeling to be


wearing such clothes. I had worn bad enough things


before, but nothing at all like these; they were not merely


dirty and shapeless, they had - how is one to express it?-a


gracelessness, a patina of antique filth, quite different


from mere shabbiness.


They were the sort of clothes you see on a bootlace seller,


or a tramp. An hour later, in Lambeth, I saw a hang-dog


man, obviously a tramp, coming towards me, and when I


looked again it was myself, reflected in a shop window.


The dirt was plastering my face already. Dirt is a great


respecter of persons; it lets you alone when you are well


dressed, but as soon as your collar is gone it flies towards


you from all directions.



   I stayed in the streets till late at night, keeping on the


move all the time. Dressed as I was, I was half afraid that


the police might arrest me as a vagabond, and I dared not


speak to anyone, imagining that they must notice a


disparity between my accent and my clothes. (Later I


discovered that this never happened.) My new clothes had


put me instantly into a new world. Everyone's demeanour


seemed to have changed abruptly. I helped a hawker pick


up a barrow that he had upset. "Thanks, mate," he said


with a grin. No one had called me mate before in my life-it


was the clothes that had done it. For the first time I


noticed, too, how the attitude of women varies with a


man's clothes. When a badly dressed man passes them


they shudder away from him with a quite frank movement


of disgust, as though he were a dead cat. Clothes are


powerful things. Dressed in a tramp's clothes it is very


difficult, at any rate for the first day, not to feel that you


are genuinely degraded. You might feel the same shame,


irrational but very real, your first night in prison.



   At about eleven I began looking for a bed. I had read


about doss-houses (they are never called dosshouses, by


the way), and I supposed that one could get a bed for


fourpence or thereabouts. Seeing a man, a navvy or


something of the kind, standing on the kerb in the


Waterloo Road, I stopped and questioned him.


I said that I was stony broke and wanted the cheapest


bed I could get.



   "Oh," said he, "you go to that 'ouse across the street


there, with the sign 'Good Beds for Single Men.' That's a


good kip [sleeping place], that is. I bin there myself on and


off You'll find it cheap





and clean."



   It was a tall, battered-looking house, with dim lights in


all the windows, some of which were patched with brown


paper. I entered a stone passage-way, and a little etiolated


boy with sleepy eyes appeared from a door leading to a


cellar. Murmurous sounds came from the cellar, and a


wave of hot air and cheese. The boy yawned and held out


his hand.



   "Want a kip? That'll be a 'og, guv'nor."



   I paid the shilling, and the boy led me up a rickety


unlighted staircase to a bedroom. It had a sweetish reek of


paregoric and foul linen; the windows seemed to be tight


shut, and the air was almost suffocating at first. There


was a candle burning, and I saw that the room measured


fifteen feet square by eight high, and had eight beds in it.


Already six lodgers were in bed, queer lumpy shapes with


all their own clothes, even their boots, piled on top of


them. Someone was coughing in a loathsome manner in


one corner.



   When I got into the bed I found that it was as hard as a


board, and as for the pillow, it was a mere hard cylinder


like a block of wood. It was rather worse than sleeping on


a table, because the bed was not six feet long, and very


narrow, and the mattress was convex, so that one had to


hold on to avoid falling out. The sheets stank so horribly


of sweat that I could not bear them near my nose. Also,


the bedclothes only consisted of the sheets and a cotton


counterpane, so that though stuffy it was none too warm.


Several noises recurred throughout the night. About once


in an hour the man on my left a sailor, I think-woke up,


swore vilely, and lighted a cigarette. Another man, victim


of a bladder disease, got up and noisily used his chamber-pot


half a dozen times during the night. The man in the corner


had a coughing fit once in every twenty minutes, so regularly


that one came to listen for it as one listens for the next


yap when a dog is baying the moon. It was an unspeakably


repellent sound; a foul bubbling and retching, as though the


man's bowels were being churned up within him. Once when he


struck a match I saw that he was a very old man, with a grey,


sunken face like that of a corpse, and he was wearing his


trousers wrapped round his head as a nightcap, a thing


which for some reason disgusted me very much. Every


time he coughed or the other man swore, a sleepy voice


from one of the other beds cried out:



   "Shut up! Oh, for Christ's ------





sake shut up!"



   I had about an hour's sleep in all. In the morning I was


woken by a dim impression of some large brown thing


coming towards me. I opened my eyes and saw that it was


one of the sailor's feet, sticking out of bed close to my


face. It was dark brown, quite dark brown like an Indian's,


with dirt. The walls were leprous, and the sheets, three


weeks from the wash, were almost raw umber colour. I got


up, dressed and went downstairs. In the cellar were a row


of basins and two slippery roller towels. I had a piece of


soap in my pocket, and I was going to wash, when I


noticed that every basin was streaked with grime-solid,


sticky filth as black as boot-blacking. I went out


unwashed. Altogether, the lodging-house had not come up


to its description as cheap and clean. It was however, as I


found later, a fairly representative lodging-house.



   I crossed the river and walked a long way eastward,


finally going into a coffeeshop on Tower Hill. Anfinally


going into a coffee-shop on Tower Hill. An


ordinary London coffee-shop, like a thousand others, it


seemed queer and foreign after Paris. It was a little stuffy


room with the high-backed pews that were fashionable in


the 'forties, the day's menu written on a mirror with a


piece of soap, and a girl of fourteen handling the dishes.


Navvies were eating out of newspaper parcels, and


drinking tea in vast saucerless mugs like china tumblers.


In a corner by himself a Jew, muzzle down in the plate,


was guiltily wolfing bacon.



   "Could I have some tea and bread and butter?" I said to


the girl.


She stared. "No butter, only marg," she said, surprised.


And she repeated the order in the phrase that is to London


what the eternal





coup de rouge is to Paris: "Large tea and


two slices!"



   On the wall beside my pew there was a notice saying


"Pocketing the sugar not allowed," and beneath it some


poetic customer had written:



He that takes away the sugar,


Shall be called a dirty---




but someone else had been at pains to scratch out the last


word. This was England. The tea-and-two-slices cost


threepence halfpenny, leaving me with eight and


twopence.




                          XXV



THE eight shillings lasted three days and four nights. After


my bad experience in the Waterloo Road'. I moved


eastward, and spent the next night in a lodginghouse in


Pennyfields. This was a typical lodging-house, like scores


of others in London. It had accommo-



1 It is a curious but well-known fact that bugs are much commoner in


south than north London. For some reason they have not yet crossed the


river in any great numbers


.



dation for between fifty and a hundred men, and was


managed by a "deputy"-a deputy for the owner, that is, for


these lodging-houses are profitable concerns and are


owned by rich men. We slept fifteen or twenty in a


dormitory; the beds were again cold and hard, but the


sheets were not more than a week from the wash, which


was an improvement. The charge was ninepence or a


shilling (in the shilling dormitory the beds were six feet


apart instead of four) and the terms were cash down by


seven in the evening or out you went.



   Downstairs there was a kitchen common to all lodgers,


with free firing and a supply of cooking-pots, tea-basins,


and toasting-forks. There were two great, clinker fires,


which were kept burning day and night the year through.


The work of tending the fires, sweeping the kitchen and


making the beds was done by the lodgers in rotation. One


senior lodger, a fine Norman-looking stevedore named


Steve, was known as "head of the house," and was arbiter


of disputes and unpaid chuckerout.



   I liked the kitchen. It was a low-ceiled cellar deep


underground, very hot and drowsy with coke fumes, and


lighted only by the fires, which cast black velvet shadows


in the corners. Ragged washing hung on strings from the


ceiling. Red-lit men, stevedores mostly, moved about the


fires with cooking-pots; some of them were quite naked,


for they had been laundering and were waiting for their


clothes to dry. At night there were games of nap and


draughts, and songs"I'm a chap what's done wrong by my


parents," was a favourite, and so was another popular song


about a shipwreck. Sometimes late at night men would


come in with a pail of winkles they had bought cheap, and


share them out. There was a general sharing of food, and it


was taken for granted to feed men who were out


of work. A little pale, wizened creature, obviously


dying, referred to as "pore Brown, bin under the doctor


and cut open three times," was regularly fed by the


others.



   Two or three of the lodgers were old-age pensioners.


Till meeting them I had never realised that there are


people in England who live on nothing but the oldage


pension of ten shillings a week. None of these old men


had any other resource whatever. One of them was


talkative, and I asked him how he managed to exist. He


said:



   "Well, there's ninepence a night for yer kip-that's five


an' threepence a week. Then there's threepence on


Saturday for a shave-that's five an' six. Then say you 'as


a 'aircut once a month for sixpence-that's another


three'apence a week. So you 'as about four an' fourpence


for food an' bacca."



   He could imagine no other expenses. His food was


bread and margarine and tea-towards the end of the week


dry bread and tea without milk-and perhaps he got his


clothes from charity. He seemed contented, valuing his


bed and fire more than food. But, with an income of ten


shillings a week, to spend money on a shave-it is awe-


inspiring.



   All day I loafed in the streets, east as far as Wapping,


west as far as Whitechapel. It was queer after Paris;


everything was so much cleaner and quieter and drearier.


One missed the scream of the trams, and the noisy,


festering life of the back streets, and the armed men


clattering through the squares. The crowds were better


dressed and the faces comelier and milder and more


alike, without that fierce individuality and malice of the


French. There was less drunkenness, and less dirt, and


less quarrelling, and more idling. Knots of men stood at


all the corners, slightly underfed, but kept


going by the tea-and-two-slices which the Londoner


swallows every two hours. One seemed to breathe a less


feverish air than in Paris. It was the land of the tea urn


and the Labour Exchange, as Paris is the land of the bistro


and the sweatshop.



   It was interesting to watch the crowds. The East


London women are pretty (it is the mixture of blood,


perhaps), and Limehouse was sprinkled with Orientals -


Chinamen, Chittagonian lascars, Dravidians selling silk


scarves, even a few Sikhs, come goodness knows how.


Here and there were street meetings. In Whitechapel


somebody called The Singing Evangel undertook to save


you from hell for the charge of sixpence. In the East


India Dock Road the Salvation Army were holding a


service. They were singing "Anybody here like sneaking


Judas?" to the tune of "What's to be done with a drunken


sailor?" On Tower Hill two Mormons were trying to


address a meeting. Round their platform struggled a mob


of men, shouting and interrupting. Someone was


denouncing them for polygamists. A lame, bearded man,


evidently an atheist, had heard the word God and was


heckling angrily. There was a confused uproar of voices.



   "My dear friends, if you would only let us finish what


we were saying-!-That's right, give 'em a say. Don't get


on the argue!-No, no, you answer me. Can you





show me


God? You show 'im me, then I'll believe in 'im.-Oh, shut


up, don't keep interrupting of 'em!Interrupt yourself!-


polygamists!-Well, there's a lot to be said for polygamy.


Take the women out of industry, anyway.-My dear


friends, if you would just


    -No, no, don't you slip out


of it. 'Ave you seen God? 'Ave you





touched 'im? 'Ave you


shook '





ands with 'im?-Oh, don't get on the argue, for


Christ's sake don't get on the





argue!" etc. etc. I listened


for twenty minutes, anxious to learn something about


Mormonism, but the meeting never got beyond shouts. It


is the general fate of street meetings.



   In Middlesex Street, among the crowds at the market, a


draggled, down-at-heel woman was hauling a brat of five


by the arm. She brandished a tin trumpet in its face. The


brat was squalling.



   "Enjoy yourself!" yelled the mother. "What yer think I


brought yer out 'ere for an' bought y'a trumpet an' all?


D'ya want to go across my knee? You little bastard, you





shall


 enjoy yerself!"



   Some drops of spittle fell from the trumpet. The mother


and the child disappeared, both bawling. It was all very


queer after Paris.



   The last night that I was in the Pennyfields lodginghouse


there was a quarrel between two of the lodgers, a vile


scene. One of the old-age pensioners, a man of about


seventy, naked to the waist (he had been laundering), was


violently abusing a short, thickset stevedore, who stood


with his back to the fire. I could see the old man's face in


the light of the fire, and he was almost crying with grief


and rage. Evidently something very serious had happened.








   The old-age pensioner


: "You---!"








   The stevedore


: "Shut yer mouth, you ole---, afore I


set about yer!"








   The old-age pensioner


: "Jest you try it on, you--!


I'm thirty year older'n you, but it wouldn't take much to


make me give you one as'd knock you into a bucketful of


piss!"








   The stevedore


: « Ah, an' then p'raps I wouldn't smash


you up after, you ole---!"



   Thus for five minutes. The lodgers sat round, unhappy,


trying to disregard the quarrel. The stevedore looked


sullen, but the old man was growing more and


more furious. He kept making little rushes at the other,


sticking out his face and screaming from a few inches


distant like a cat on a wall, and spitting. He was trying to


nerve himself to strike a blow, and not quite suc


ceeding. Finally he burst out:



   "A--, that's what you are, a---! Take that


in your dirty gob and suck it, you--! By--, I'll


smash you afore I've done with you. A---, that's


what you are, a son of a --- whore. Lick that, you---!


That's what I think of you, you---, you---, you---


you BLACK BASTARD!"



   Whereat he suddenly collapsed on a bench, took his


face in his hands, and began crying. The other man seeing


that public feeling was against him, went out.



   Afterwards I heard Steve explaining the cause of the


quarrel. It appeared that it was all about a shilling's worth


of food. In some way the old man had lost his store of


bread and margarine, and so would have nothing to eat


for the next three days, except what the others gave him


in charity. The stevedore, who was in work and well fed,


had taunted him; hence the quarrel.



   When my money was down to one and fourpence I went


for a night to a lodging house in Bow, where the charge


was only eightpence. One went down an area and through


an alley-way into a deep, stifling cellar, ten feet square.


Ten men, navvies mostly, were sitting in the fierce glare


of the fire. It was midnight, but the deputy's son, a pale,


sticky child of five, was there playing on the navvies'


knees. An old Irishman was whistling to a blind bullfinch


in a tiny cage. There were other songbirds there-tiny,


faded things, that had lived all their lives underground.


The lodgers habitually made water in the fire, to save


going across a yard to the lavatory. As I sat at the table I


felt something stir near my feet, and, looking down, saw a


wave of black things moving slowly across the floor; they


were blackbeetles.



   There were six beds in the dormitory, and the sheets,


marked in huge letters "Stolen from No.--- Road," smelt


loathsome. In the next bed to me lay a very old man, a


pavement artist, with some extraordinary curvature of the


spine that made him stick right out of bed, with his back a


foot or two from my face. It was bare, and marked with


curious swirls of dirt, like a marble table-top. During the


night a man came in drunk and was sick on the floor,


close to my bed. There were bugs too-not so bad as in


Paris, but enough to keep one awake. It was a filthy place.


Yet the deputy and his wife were friendly people, and


ready to make one a cup of tea at any hour of the day or


night.




                         XXVI



IN the morning after paying for the usual tea-andtwo-


slices and buying half an ounce of tobacco, I had a


halfpenny left. I did not care to ask B. for more money


yet, so there was nothing for it but to go to a casual


ward. I had very little idea how to set about this, but I


knew that there was a casual ward at Romton, so I


walked out there, arriving at three or four in the after-


noon. Leaning against the pigpens in Romton market-


place was a wizened old Irishman, obviously a tramp. I


went and leaned beside him, and presently offered him


my tobacco-box. He opened the box and looked at the


tobacco in astonishment:



   "By God," he said, "dere's sixpennorth o' good baccy


here! Where de hell d'you get hold o' dat? You ain't


been on de road long."



   "What, don't you have tobacco on the road?" I said.



   "Oh, we





has it. Look."



   He produced a rusty tin which had once held Oxo


Cubes. In it were twenty or thirty cigarette ends, picked


up from the pavement. The Irishman said that he rarely


got any other tobacco; he added that, with care, one


could collect two ounces of tobacco a day on the


London pavements.



   "D'you come out o' one o' de London spikes [casual


wards], eh?" he asked me.



   I said yes, thinking this would make him accept me as a


fellow tramp, and asked him what the spike at Romton


was like. He said:



   "Well, 'tis a cocoa spike. Dere's tay spikes, and cocoa


spikes, and skilly spikes. Dey don't give you skilly in


Romton, t'ank God-leastways, dey didn't de last time I


was here. I been up to York and round Wales since."



   "What is skilly?" I said.



   "Skilly? A can o' hot water wid some bloody oatmeal


at de bottom; dat's skilly. De skilly spikes is always de


worst."



   We stayed talking for an hour or two. The Irishman was a


friendly old man, but he smelt very unpleasant, which was


not surprising when one learned how many diseases he


suffered from. It appeared (he described his symptoms


fully) that taking him from top to bottom he had the


following things wrong with him: on his crown, which


was bald, he had eczema; he was shortsighted, and had no


glasses; he had chronic bronchitis; he had some


undiagnosed pain in the back; he had dyspepsia; he had


urethritis; he had varicose veins, bunions and flat feet.


With this assemblage of diseases he had tramped the


roads for fifteen years.



   At about five the Irishmen said, "Could you do wid e


cup o' tay? De spike don't open till six."



   "I should think I could."



   "Well, dere's a place here where dey gives you a free


cup o' tay and a bun.





Good tay it is. Dey makes you say


a lot o' bloody prayers after; but hell! It all passes de


time away. You come wid me."



   He led the way to a small tin-roofed shed in a side-


street, rather like a village cricket pavilion. About


twenty-five other tramps were waiting. A few of them


were dirty old habitual vagabonds, the majority decent-


looking lads from the north, probably miners or cotton


operatives out of work. Presently the door opened and a


lady in a blue silk dress, wearing gold spectacles end a


crucifix, welcomed us in. Inside were thirty or forty hard


chairs, a harmonium, and a very gory lithograph of the


Crucifixion.



   Uncomfortably we took off our caps end sat down. The


lady handed out the tea, and while we ate and drank she


moved to and fro, talking benignly. She talked upon


religious subjects-about Jesus Christ always having e


soft spot for poor rough men like us, and about how


quickly the time passed when you were in church, and


what a difference it made to a man on the road if he said


his prayers regularly. We hated it. We sat against the


well fingering our caps (a tramp feels indecently exposed


with his cap off), and turning pink and trying to mumble


something when the lady addressed us. There was no


doubt that she meant it all kindly. As she came up to one


of the north country lads with the plate of buns, she said


to him:



   "And you, my boy, how long is it since you knelt down


and spoke with your Father in Heaven?"



   Poor lad, not a word could he utter; but his belly


answered for him, with a disgraceful rumbling which


it set up at sight of the food. Thereafter he was so


overcome with shame that he could scarcely swallow his


bun. Only one men managed to answer the lady in her


own style, end he was a spry, red-nosed fellow looking


like a corporal who had lost his stripe for drunkenness.


He could pronounce the words "the dear Lord Jesus"


with less shame then anyone I ever saw. No doubt he had


learned the knack in prison.



   Tea ended, and I saw the tramps looking furtively at


one another. An unspoken thought was running from


man to man-could we possibly make off before the


prayers started? Someone stirred in his chair-not getting


up actually, but with just a glance at the door, as though


half suggesting the idea of departure. The lady quelled


him with one look. She said in a more benign tone than


ever:



   "I don't think you need go





quite yet. The casual ward


doesn't open till six, and we have time to kneel down and


say a few words to our Father first. I think we should all


feel better after that, shouldn't we?"



  The red-nosed man was very helpful, pulling the


harmonium into place and handing out the prayerbooks.


His back was to the lady as he did this, and it was his


idea of a joke to deal the books like a pack of cards,


whispering to each men as he did so, "There y'are, mate,


there's a--- nap 'end for yer! Four aces and a king!" etc.



   Bareheaded, we knelt down among the dirty teacups


and began to mumble that we had left undone those


things that we ought to have done, and done those things


that we ought not to have done, and there was no health


in us. The lady prayed very fervently, but her eyes roved


over us all the time, making sure that we were attending.


When she was not looking we grinned and winked at one


another, and whispered bawdy jokes, just to show that we did


not care; but it stuck in our throats a little. No one except


the rednosed man was self-possessed enough to speak the


responses above a whisper. We got on better with the singing,


except that one old tramp knew no tune but "Onward,


Christian soldiers," and reverted to it sometimes,


spoiling the harmony.



   The prayers lasted half an hour, and then, after a


handshake at the door, we made off. "Well," said


somebody as soon as we were out of hearing, "the


trouble's over. I thought them ----prayers was never goin'


to end."



   "You 'ad your bun," said another; "you got to pay for


it."



   "Pray for it, you mean. Ah, you don't get much for


nothing. They can't even give you a twopenny cup of tea


without you go down on you -----knees for it."



   There were murmurs of agreement. Evidently the


tramps were not grateful for their tea. And yet it was


excellent tea, as different from coffee-shop tea as good


Bordeaux is from the muck called colonial claret, and we


were all glad of it. I am sure too that it was given in a


good spirit, without any intention of humiliating us; so in


fairness we ought to have been grateful-still, we were


not.




                    XXVII



AT about a quarter to six the Irishman led me to the spike.


It was a grim, smoky yellow cube of brick, standing in a


corner of the workhouse grounds. With its rows of tiny,


barred windows, and a high wall and iron gates separating


it from the road, it looked much like a prison. Already a


long queue of ragged men had


formed up, waiting for the gates to open. They were of


all kinds and ages, the youngest a fresh-faced boy of


sixteen, the oldest a doubled-up, toothless mummy of


seventy-five. Some were hardened tramps, recognisable


by their sticks and billies and dust-darkened faces; some


were factory hands out of work, some agricultural


labourers, one a clerk in collar and tie, two certainly


imbeciles. Seen in the mass, lounging there, they were a


disgusting sight; nothing villainous or dangerous, but a


graceless, mangy crew, nearly all ragged and palpably


underfed. They were friendly, however, and asked no


questions. Many offered me tobacco-cigarette ends,


that is.



   We leaned against the wall, smoking, and the tramps


began to talk about the spikes they had been in recently.


It appeared from what they said that all spikes are


different, each with its peculiar merits and demerits, and


it is important to know these when you are on the road.


An old hand will tell you the peculiarities of every spike


in England, as: at A you are allowed to smoke but there


are bugs in the cells; at B the beds are comfortable but


the porter is a bully; at C they let you out early in the


morning but the tea is undrinkable; at D the officials


steal your money if you have any-and so on


interminably. There are regular beaten tracks where the


spikes are within a day's march of one another. I was


told that the Barnet-St. Albans route is the best, and they


warned me to steer clear of Billericay and Chelmsford,


also Ide Hill in Kent. Chelsea was said to be the most


luxurious spike in England; someone, praising it, said


that the blankets there were more like prison than the


spike. Tramps go far afield in summer, and in winter,


they circle as much as possible round the large towns,


where it is warmer and there is more charity. But they


have to keep moving, for you may not enter any one spike,


or any two London spikes, more than once in a month, on pain


of being confined for a week.



   Some time after six the gates opened and we began to


file in one at a time. In the yard was an office where an


official entered in a ledger our names and trades and ages,


also the places we were coming from and going to-this last


is intended to keep a check on the movements of tramps. I


gave my trade as "painter"; I had painted water-colours-


who has not? The official also asked us whether we had


any money, and every man said no. It is against the law to


enter the spike with more than eightpence, and any sum


less than this one is supposed to hand over at the gate. But


as a rule the tramps prefer to smuggle their money in,


tying it tight in a piece of cloth so that it will not chink.


Generally they put it in the bag of tea and sugar that every


tramp carries, or among their "papers." The "papers" are


considered sacred and are never searched.



   After registering at the office we were led into the


spike by an official known as the Tramp Major (his job is


to supervise casuals, and he is generally a workhouse


pauper) and a great bawling ruffian of a porter in a blue


uniform, who treated us like cattle. The spike consisted


simply of a bathroom and lavatory, and, for the rest, long


double rows of stone cells, perhaps a hundred cells in all.


It was a bare, gloomy place of stone and whitewash,


unwillingly clean, with a smell which, somehow, I had


foreseen from its appearance; a smell of soft soap, Jeyes'


fluid and latrines-a cold, discouraging, prisonish smell.



   The porter herded us all into the passage, and then told


us to come into the bathroom six at a time, to be searched


before bathing. The search was for money and tobacco,


Romton being one of those spikes where you


can smoke once you have smuggled your tobacco in, but it


will be confiscated if it is found on you. The old hands


had told us that the porter never searched below the knee,


so before going in we had all hidden our tobacco in the


ankles of our boots. Afterwards, while undressing, we


slipped it into our coats, which we were allowed to keep,


to serve as pillows.



   The scene in the bathroom was extraordinarily re-


pulsive. Fifty dirty, stark-naked men elbowing each other


in a room twenty feet square, with only two bathtubs and


two slimy roller towels between them all. I shall never


forget the reek of dirty feet. Less than half the tramps


actually bathed (I heard them saying that hot water is


"weakening" to the system), but they all washed their


faces and feet, and the horrid greasy little clouts known as


toe-rags which they bind round their toes. Fresh water was


only allowed for men who were having a complete bath,


so many men had to bathe in water where others had


washed their feet. The porter shoved us to and fro, giving


the rough side of his tongue when anyone wasted time.


When my turn came for the bath, I asked if I might swill


out the tub, which was streaked with dirt, before using it.


He answered simply, "Shut yer mouth and get on with yer


bath!" That set the social tone of the place, and I did not


speak again.



   When we had finished bathing, the porter tied our


clothes in bundles and gave us workhouse shirts-grey


cotton things of doubtful cleanliness, like abbreviated


nightgowns. We were sent along to the cells at once, and


presently the porter and the Tramp Major brought our


supper across from the workhouse. Each man's ration was


a half-pound wedge of bread smeared with margarine, and


a pint of bitter sugarless cocoa in a tin billy. Sitting on the


floor we wolfed this in five


minutes, and at about seven o'clock the cell doors were


locked on the outside, to remain locked till eight in the


morning.



   Each man was allowed to sleep with his mate, the cells


being intended to hold two men apiece. I had no mate, and


was put in with another solitary man, a thin scrubby-faced


fellow with a slight squint. The cell measured eight feet by


five by eight high, was made of stone, and had a tiny


barred window high up in the wall and a spyhole in the


door, just like a cell in a prison. In it were six blankets, a


chamber-pot, a hot water pipe, and nothing else whatever.


I looked round the cell with a vague feeling that there was


something missing. Then, with a shock of surprise, I


realised what it was, and exclaimed:



   "But I say, damn it, where are the beds?"



   "





Beds?" said the other man, surprised. "There aren't no


beds! What yer expect? This is one of them spikes where


you sleeps on the floor. Christ! Ain't you got used to that


yet?"



   It appeared that no beds was quite a normal condition


in the spike. We rolled up our coats and put them against


the hot-water pipe, and made ourselves as comfortable as


we could. It grew foully stuffy, but it was not warm


enough to allow of our putting all the blankets underneath,


so that we could only use one to soften the floor. We lay a


foot apart, breathing into one another's face, with our


naked limbs constantly touching, and rolling against one


another whenever we fell asleep. One fidgeted from side


to side, but it did not do much good; whichever way one


turned there would be first a dull numb feeling, than a


sharp ache as the hardness of the floor wore through the


blanket. One could sleep, but not for more than ten


minutes on end.



   About midnight the other man began making homo-


sexual attempts upon me-a nasty experience in a locked,


pitch-dark cell. He was a feeble creature and I could


manage him easily, but of course it was impossible to go


to sleep again. For the rest of the night we stayed awake,


smoking and talking. The man told me the story of his


life-he was a fitter, out of work for three years. He said


that his wife had promptly deserted him when he lost his


job, and he had been so long away from women that he


had almost forgotten what they were like. Homosexuality


is general among tramps of long standing, he said.



   At eight the porter came along the passage unlocking


the doors and shouting "All out!" The doors opened,


letting out a stale, fetid stink. At once the passage was full


of squalid, grey-shirted figures, each chamber-pot in hand,


scrambling for the bathroom. It appeared that in the


morning only one tub of water was allowed for the lot of


us, and when I arrived twenty tramps had already washed


their faces; I took one glance at the black scum floating on


the water, and went unwashed. After this we were given a


breakfast identical with the previous night's supper, our


clothes were returned to us, and we were ordered out into


the yard to work. The work was peeling potatoes for the


pauper's dinner, but it was a mere formality, to keep us


occupied until the doctor came to inspect us. Most of the


tramps frankly idled. The doctor turned up at about ten


o'clock and we were told to go back to our cells, strip and


wait in the passage for the inspection.



   Naked and shivering, we lined up in the passage. You


cannot conceive what ruinous, degenerate curs we looked,


standing there in the merciless morning light. A tramp's


clothes are bad, but they conceal far worse things; to see


him as he really is, unmitigated,


you must see him naked. Flat feet, pot bellies, hollow


chests, sagging muscles-every kind of physical rottenness


was there. Nearly everyone was under-nourished, and


some clearly diseased; two men were wearing trusses, and


as for the old mummy-like creature of seventy-five, one


wondered how he could possibly make his daily march.


Looking at our faces, unshaven and creased from the


sleepless night, you would have thought that all of us were


recovering from a week on the drink.



   The inspection was designed merely to detect small-


pox, and took no notice of our general condition. A young


medical student, smoking a cigarette, walked rapidly


along the line glancing us up and down, and not inquiring


whether any man was well or ill. When my cell


companion stripped I saw that his chest was covered with


a red rash, and, having spent the night a few inches away


from him, I fell into a panic about smallpox. The doctor,


however, examined the rash and said that it was due


merely to under-nourishment.



   After the inspection we dressed and were sent into the


yard, where the porter called our names over, gave us back


any possessions we had left at the office, and distributed


meal tickets. These were worth sixpence each, and were


directed to coffee-shops on the route we had named the


night before. It was interesting to see that quite a number


of the tramps could not read, and had to apply to myself


and other "scholards" to decipher their tickets.



   The gates were opened, and we dispersed immediately.


How sweet the air does smell-even the air of a back street


in the suburbs-after the shut-in, subfaecal stench of the


spike! I had a mate now, for while we were peeling


potatoes I had made friends with an Irish tramp named


Paddy Jaques, a melancholy


pale man who seemed clean and decent. He was going to


Edbury spike, and suggested that we should go together.


We set out, getting there at three in the afternoon. It was a


twelve-mile walk, but we made it fourteen by getting lost


among the desolate north London slums. Our meal tickets


were directed to a coffee-shop in Ilford. When we got


there, the little chit of a serving-maid, having seen our


tickets and grasped that we were tramps, tossed her head


in contempt and for a long time would not serve us.


Finally she slapped on the table two "large teas" and four


slices of bread and dripping-that is, eightpenny-worth of


food. It appeared that the shop habitually cheated the


tramps of twopence or so on each ticket; having tickets


instead of money, the tramps could not protest or go


elsewhere.





               XXVIII



PADDY was my mate for about the next fortnight, and, as


he was the first tramp I had known at all well, I want to


give an account of him. I believe that he was a typical


tramp and there are tens of thousands in England like him.




  He was a tallish man, aged about thirty-five, with fair


hair going grizzled and watery blue eyes. His features


were good, but his cheeks had lanked and had that greyish,


dirty in the grain look that comes of a bread and margarine


diet. He was dressed, rather better than most tramps, in a


tweed shooting jacket and a pair of old evening trousers


with the braid still on them. Evidently the braid figured in


his mind as a lingering scrap of respectability, and he took


care to sew it on again when it came loose. He was careful


of his appearance altogether, and carried a razor and


bootbrush that he would not sell, though he had sold his


"papers" and even his pocket-knife long since.


Nevertheless, one would have known him for a tramp a


hundred yards away. There was something in his drifting


style of walk, and the way he had of hunching his


shoulders forward, essentially abject. Seeing him walk,


you felt instinctively that he would sooner take a blow


than give one.




  He had been brought up in Ireland, served two years


in the war, and then worked in a metal polish factory,


where he had lost his job two years earlier. He was


horribly ashamed of being a tramp, but he had picked up


all a tramp's ways. He browsed the pavements


unceasingly, never missing a cigarette end, or even an


empty cigarette packet, as he used the tissue paper for


rolling cigarettes. On our way into Edbury he saw a


newspaper parcel on the pavement, pounced on it, and


found that it contained two mutton sandwiches, rather


frayed at the edges; these he insisted on my sharing. He


never passed an automatic machine without giving a tug


at the handle, for he said that sometimes they are out of


order and will eject pennies if you tug at them. He had


no stomach for crime, however. When we were in the


outskirts of Romton, Paddy noticed a bottle of milk on a


doorstep, evidently left there by mistake. He stopped,


eyeing the bottle hungrily.



   "Christ!" he said, "dere's good food goin' to waste.


Somebody could knock dat bottle off, eh? Knock it off


easy."



   I saw that he was thinking of "knocking it off" himself.


He looked up and down the street; it was a quiet


residential street and there was nobody in sight. Paddy's


sickly, chap-fallen face yearned over the milk. Then he


turned away, saying gloomily:



   "Best leave it. It don't do a man no good to steal.


Tank God, I ain't never stolen nothin' yet."



   It was funk, bred of hunger, that kept him virtuous.


With only two or three sound meals in his belly, he would


have found courage to steal the milk.



   He had two subjects of conversation, the shame and


come-down of being a tramp, and the best way of getting


a free meal. As we drifted through the streets he would


keep up a monologue in this style, in a whimpering, self-


pitying Irish voice:



   "It's hell bein' on de road, eh? It breaks yer heart goin'


into dem bloody spikes. But what's a man to do else, eh?


I ain't had a good meat meal for about two months, an'


me boots is getting bad, an'-Christ! How'd it be if we was


to try for a cup o' tay at one o' dem convents on de way


to Edbury? Most times dey're good for a cup o' tay. Ah,


what'd a man do widout religion, eh? I've took cups o' tay


from de convents, an' de Baptists, an' de Church of


England, an' all sorts. I'm a Catholic meself. Dat's to say,


I ain't been to confession for. about seventeen year, but


still I got me religious feelin's, y'understand. An' dem


convents is always good for a cup o' tay . . ." etc. etc. He


would keep this up all day, almost without stopping.



   His ignorance was limitless and appalling. He once


asked me, for instance, whether Napoleon lived before


Jesus Christ or after. Another time, when I was looking


into a bookshop window, he grew very perturbed because


one of the books was called Of the





Imitation of Christ. He


took this for blasphemy. "What de hell do dey want to go


imitatin' of





Him for?" he demanded angrily. He could


read, but he had a kind of loathing for books. On our


way from Romton to Edbury I went into a public library,


and, though Paddy did not want to read, I suggested that


he should come in and rest his



legs. But he preferred to wait on the pavement. "No," he


said, "de sight of all dat bloody print makes me sick."



   Like most tramps, he was passionately mean about


matches. He had a box of matches when I met him, but I


never saw him strike one, and he used to lecture me for


extravagance when I struck mine. His method was to


cadge a light from strangers, sometimes going without a


smoke for half an hour rather than strike a match.



   Self-pity was the clue to his character. The thought of


his bad luck never seemed to leave him for an instant. He


would break long silences to exclaim, apropos of nothing,


"It's hell when yer clo'es begin to go up de spout, eh?" or


"Dat tay in de spike ain't tay, it's piss," as though there


was nothing else in the world to think about. And he had a


low, worm-like envy of anyone who was better off-not of


the rich, for they were beyond his social horizon, but of


men in work. He pined for work as an artist pines to be


famous. If he saw an old man working he would say


bitterly, "Look at dat old keepin' able-bodied men out o'


work"; or if it was a boy, "It's dem young devils what's


takin' de bread out of our mouths." And all foreigners to


him were "dem bloody dagoes"-for, according to his


theory, foreigners were responsible for unemployment.



   He looked at women with a mixture of longing and


hatred. Young, pretty women were too much above him to


enter into his ideas, but his mouth watered at prostitutes.


A couple of scarlet-lipped old creatures would go past;


Paddy's face would flush pale pink, and he would turn and


stare hungrily after the women. "Tarts!" he would


murmur, like a boy at a sweetshop window. He told me


once that he had not had to do with a woman for two


years-since he had lost his job, that is-and he had


forgotten that one could aim higherthan prostitutes.


He had the regular character of a tramp-abject, envious,


a jackal's character.



   Nevertheless, he was a good fellow, generous by nature


and capable of sharing his last crust with a friend;


indeed he did literally share his last crust with me


more than once. He was probably capable of work too, if


he had been well fed for a few months. But two years of


bread and margarine had lowered his standards hopelessly.


He had lived on this filthy imitation of food till his own


mind and body were compounded of inferior stuff. It was


malnutrition and not any native vice that had destroyed


his manhood.




                    XXIX



ON the way to Edbury I told Paddy that I had a friend


from whom I could be sure of getting money, and


suggested going straight into London rather than face


another night in the spike. But Paddy had not been in


Edbury spike recently, and, tramp-like, he would not


waste a night's free lodging. We arranged to go into


London the next morning. I had only a halfpenny, but


Paddy had two shillings, which would get us a bed each


and a few cups of tea.



   The Edbury spike did not differ much from the one at


Romton. The worst feature was that all tobacco was


confiscated at the gate, and we were warned that any man


caught smoking would be turned out at once. Under the


Vagrancy Act tramps can be prosecuted for smoking in the


spike-in fact, they can be prosecuted for almost anything;


but the authorities generally save the trouble of a


prosecution by turning disobedient men out of doors.


There was no work to do, and the cells were fairly


comfortable. We slept two in a cell,


"one up, one down"-that is, one on a wooden shelf and


one on the floor, with straw palliasses and plenty of


blankets, dirty but not verminous. The food was the same


as at Romton, except that we had tea instead of cocoa.


One could get extra tea in the morning, as the Tramp


Major was selling it at a halfpenny a mug, illicitly no


doubt. We were each given a hunk of bread and cheese to


take away for our midday meal.



   When we got into London we had eight hours to kill


before the lodging-houses opened. It is curious how one


does not notice things. I had been in London innumerable


times, and yet till that day I had never noticed one of the


worst things about London-the fact that it costs money


even to sit down. In Paris, if you had no money and could


not find a public bench, you would sit on the pavement.


Heaven knows what sitting on the pavement would lead to


in London-prison, probably. By four we had stood five


hours, and our feet seemed red-hot from the hardness of


the stones. We were hungry, having eaten our ration as


soon as we left the spike, and I was out of tobacco-it


mattered less to Paddy, who picked up cigarette ends. We


tried two churches and found them locked. Then we tried a


public library, but there were no seats in it.-As a last hope


Paddy suggested trying a Romton House; by the rules they


would not let us in before seven, but we might slip in


unnoticed. We walked up to the magnificent doorway (the


Rowton Houses really are magnificent) and very casually,


trying to look like regular lodgers, began to stroll in.


Instantly a man lounging in the doorway, a sharp-faced


fellow, evidently in some position of authority, barred the


way.



   "You men sleep 'ere last night?"



   "No."



   "Then-off."



   We obeyed, and stood two more hours on the street


corner. It was unpleasant, but it taught me not to use the


expression "street corner loafer," so I gained something


from it.



   At six we went to a Salvation Army shelter. We could


not book beds till eight and it was not certain that there


would be any vacant, but an official, who called us


"Brother," let us in on the condition that we paid for two


cups of tea. The main hall of the shelter was a great white-


washed barn of a place, oppressively clean and bare, with


no fires. Two hundred decentish, rather subdued-looking


people were sitting packed on long wooden benches. One


or two officers in uniform prowled up and down. On the


wall were pictures of General Booth, and notices


prohibiting cooking, drinking, spitting, swearing,


quarrelling and gambling. As a specimen of these notices,


here is one that I copied word for word:



"Any man found gambling or playing cards will be


expelled and will not be admitted under any


circumstances.


"A reward will be given for information leading to


the discovery of such persons.


"The officers in charge appeal to all lodgers to


assist them in keeping this hostel free from the


DETESTABLE EVIL OF GAMBLING."




   "Gambling or playing cards" is a delightful phrase.



   To my eye these Salvation Army shelters, though clean,


are far drearier than the worst of the common lodging-


houses. There is such a hopelessness about some of the


people there-decent, broken-down types who have pawned


their collars but are still trying for office jobs.


Coming to a Salvation Army shelter, where it is


at least clean, is their last clutch at respectability. At the


next table to me were two foreigners, dressed in rags


but manifestly gentlemen. They were playing chess


verbally, not even writing down the moves. One of them


was blind, and I heard them say that they had been


saving up for a long time to buy a board, price half a


crown, but could never manage it. Here and there were


clerks out of work, pallid and moody. Among a group of


them a tall, thin, deadly pale young man was talking


excitedly. He thumped his fist on the table and boasted


in a strange, feverish style. When the officers were out


of hearing he broke out into startling blasphemies



   "I tell you what, boys, I'm going to get that job to-


morrow. I'm not one of your bloody down-on-the-knee


brigade; I can look after myself. Look at that notice there!


'The Lord will provide!' A bloody lot He's ever provided me


with. You don't catch me trusting to the


  Lord. You


leave it to me, boys.





I'm going to get that job," etc. etc.



   I watched him, struck by the wild, agitated way in


which he talked; he seemed hysterical, or perhaps a little


drunk. An hour later I went into a small room, apart


from the main hall, which was intended for reading. It


had no books or papers in it, so few of the lodgers went


there. As I opened the door I saw the young clerk in there


all alone; he was on his knees, praying. Before I shut the


door again I had time to see his face, and it looked


agonised. Quite suddenly I realised, from the expression


of his face, that he was starving.



   The charge for beds was eightpence. Paddy and I had


fivepence left, and we spent it at the "bar," where food


was cheap, though not so cheap as in some common


lodging-houses. The tea appeared to be made


with tea





dust, which I fancy had been given to the


Salvation Army in charity, though they sold it at three-


halfpence a cup. It was foul stuff. At ten o'clock an


officer marched round the hall blowing a whistle.


Immediately everyone stood up.



   "What's this for?" I said to Paddy, astonished.



   "Dat means you has to go off to bed. An' you has to


look sharp about it, too."



   Obediently as sheep, the whole two hundred men


trooped off to bed, under the command of the officers.



   The dormitory was a great attic like a barrack room, with


sixty or seventy beds in it. They were clean and tolerably


comfortable, but very narrow and very close together, so


that one breathed straight into one's neighbour's face.


Two officers slept in the room, to see that there was no


smoking and no talking after lights-out. Paddy and I had


scarcely a wink of sleep, for there was a man near us


who had some nervous trouble, shellshock perhaps,


which made him cry out "Pip!" at irregular intervals. It


was a loud, startling noise, something like the toot of a


small motor-horn. You never knew when it was coming,


and it was a sure preventer of sleep. It appeared that Pip,


as the others called him, slept regularly in the shelter,


and he must have kept ten or twenty people awake every


night. He was an example of the kind of thing that


prevents one from ever getting enough sleep when men


are herded as they are in these lodging-houses.



   At seven another whistle blew, and the officers went


round shaking those who did not get up at once. Since


then I have slept in a number of Salvation Army


shelters, and found that, though the different houses


vary a little, this semi-military discipline is the same in


all of them. They are certainly cheap, but they are too


like workhouses for my taste. In some of them there is


even a compulsory religious service once or twice a week,


which the lodgers must attend or leave the house. The fact


is that the Salvation Army are so in the habit of thinking


themselves a charitable body that they cannot even run a


lodging-house without making it stink of charity.



   At ten I went to B.'s office and asked him to lend me a


pound. He gave me two pounds and told me to come again


when necessary, so that Paddy and I were free of money


troubles for a week at least. We loitered the day in


Trafalgar Square, looking for a friend of Paddy's who


never turned up, and at night went to a lodginghouse in a


back alley near the Strand. The charge was elevenpence,


but it was a dark, evil-smelling place, and a notorious


haunt of the "nancy boys." Downstairs, in the murky


kitchen, three ambiguous-looking youths in smartish blue


suits were sitting on a bench apart, ignored by the other


lodgers. I suppose they were "nancy boys." They looked


the same type as the apache boys one sees in Paris, except


that they wore no sidewhiskers. In front of the fire a fully


dressed man and a stark-naked man were bargaining. They


were newspaper sellers. The dressed man was selling his


clothes to the naked man. He said:



   "'Ere y'are, the best rig-out you ever 'ad. A tosheroon


[half a crown] for the coat, two 'ogs for the trousers, one


and a tanner for the boots, and a 'og for the cap and scarf.


That's seven bob."



   "You got a 'ope! I'll give yer one and a tanner for the


coat, a 'og for the trousers, and two 'ogs for the rest.


That's four and a tanner."



   "Take the 'ole lot for five and a tanner, chum."


"Right y'are, off with 'em. I got to get out to sell my late


edition."



   The clothed man stripped, and in three minutes their


positions were reversed; the naked man dressed, and the


other kilted with a sheet of the Daily Mail.



   The dormitory was dark and close, with fifteen beds in


it. There was a horrible hot reek of urine, so beastly that at


first one tried to breathe in small, shallow puffs, not filling


one's lungs to the bottom. As I lay down in bed a man


loomed out of the darkness, leant over me and began


babbling in an educated, half-drunken voice:



   "An old public school boy, what? [He had heard me


say something to Paddy.] Don't meet many of the old


school here. I am an old Etonian. You know-twenty years


hence this weather and all that." He began to quaver out


the Eton boating-song, not untunefully:




            "Jolly boating weather,



            And a hay harvest---"





   "Stop that----


 noise!" shouted several lodgers.



   "Low types," said the old Etonian, "very low types. Funny


sort of place for you and me, eh? Do you know what my


friends say to me? They say, 'M-, you are past


redemption.' Quite true, I am past redemption.


I've come down in the world; not like these-----


      s here,


who couldn't come down if they tried. We chaps who


have come down ought to hang together a bit. Youth will


be still in our faces-you know. May I offer you a drink?"



   He produced a bottle of cherry brandy, and at the same


moment lost his balance and fell heavily across my legs.


Paddy, who was undressing, pulled him upright.



   "Get back to yer bed, you silly ole-----


     !"



   The old Etonian walked unsteadily to his bed and


crawled under the sheets with all his clothes on, even his


boots. Several times in the night I heard him murmuring,


"M-, you are past redemption," as though the phrase


appealed to him. In the morning he was


lying asleep fully dressed, with the bottle clasped in his


arms. He was a man of about fifty, with a refined, worn


face, and, curiously enough, quite fashionably dressed. It


was queer to see his good patent-leather shoes sticking out


of that filthy bed. It occurred to me, too, that the cherry


brandy must have cost the equivalent of a fortnight's


lodging, so he could not have been seriously hard up.


Perhaps he frequented common lodginghouses in search of


the "nancy boys."



   The beds were not more than two feet apart. About


midnight I woke up to find that the man next to me was


trying to steal the money from beneath my pillow. He was


pretending to be asleep while he did it, sliding his hand


under the pillow as gently as a rat. In the morning I saw


that he was a hunchback, with long, apelike arms. I told


Paddy about the attempted theft. He laughed and said:



   "Christ! You got to get used to dat. Dese lodgin'


houses is full o' thieves. In some houses dere's notlain'


safe but to sleep wid all yer clo'es on. I seen 'em steal a


wooden leg off a cripple before now. Once I see a man-


fourteen stone man he was-come into a lodgin'-house wid


four pound ten. He puts it under his mattress. 'Now,' he


says, 'any dat touches dat money does it over my body,'


he says. But dey done him all de same. In de mornin' he


woke up on de floor. Four fellers had took his mattress by


de corners an' lifted him off as light as a feather. He never


saw his four pound ten again."






                      XXX



THE next morning we began looking once more for


Paddy's friend, who was called Bozo, and was a screever-


that is, a pavement artist. Addresses did


not exist in Paddy's world, but he had a vague idea that


Bozo might be found in Lambeth, and in the end we ran


across him on the Embankment, where he had established


himself not far from Waterloo Bridge. He was kneeling on


the pavement with a box of chalks, copying a sketch of


Winston Churchill from a penny note-book. The likeness


was not at all bad. Bozo was a small, dark, hook-nosed


man, with curly hair growing low on his head. His right


leg was dreadfully deformed, the foot being twisted heel


forward in a way horrible to see. From his appearance one


could have taken him for a Jew, but he used to deny this


vigorously. He spoke of his hook-nose as "Roman," and


was proud of his resemblance to some Roman Emperor-it


was Vespasian, I think.



   Bozo had a strange way of talking, Cockneyfied and


yet very lucid and expressive. It was as though he had


read good books but had never troubled to correct his


grammar. For a while Paddy and I stayed on the


Embankment, talking, and Bozo gave us an account of the


screeving trade. I repeat what he said more or less in his


own words.



   "I'm what they call a serious screever. I don't draw in


blackboard chalks like these others, I use proper colours


the same as what painters use; bloody expensive they are,


especially the reds. I use five bobs' worth of colours in a


long day, and never less than two bobs' worth.' Cartoons


is my line-you know, politics and cricket and that. Look


here"-he showed me his notebook-"here's likenesses of all


the political blokes, what I've copied from the papers. I


have a different cartoon every day. For instance, when the


Budget was on I had one of Winston trying to push an


elephant



1


 Pavement artists buy their colours in the form of powder,


and work them into cakes with condensed milk


.



marked 'Debt,' and underneath I wrote, 'Will he budge


it?' See? You can have cartoons about any of the parties,


but you mustn't put anything in favour of Socialism,


because the police won't stand it. Once I did a cartoon of


a boa constrictor marked Capital swallowing a rabbit


marked Labour. The copper came along and saw it, and


he says, 'You rub that out, and look sharp about it,' he


says. I had to rub it out. The copper's got the right to


move you on for loitering, and it's no good giving them a


back answer."



   I asked Bozo what one could earn at screeving. He


said:



   "This time of year, when it don't rain, I take about three


quid between Friday and Sunday-people get their wages


Fridays, you see. I can't work when it rains; the colours


get washed off straight away. Take the year round, I make


about a pound a week, because you can't do much in the


winter. Boat Race day, and Cup Final day, I've took as


much as four pounds. But you have to cut it out of them,


you know; you don't take a bob if you just sit and look at


them. A halfpenny's the usual drop [gift], and you don't


get even that unless you give them a bit of backchat.


Once they've answered you they feel ashamed not to give


you a drop. The best thing's to keep changing your


picture, because when they see you drawing they'll stop


and watch you. The trouble is, the beggars scatter as soon


as you turn round with the hat. You really want a nobber


[assistant] at this game. You keep at work and get a crowd


watching you, and the nobber comes casual-like round the


back of them. They don't know he's the nobber. Then


suddenly he pulls his cap off, and you got them between


two fires like. You'll never get a drop off real toffs. It's


shabby sort of blokes you get most off, and foreigners.


I've had even sixpences off Japs, and blackies, and that.


They're not so bloody mean as what an Englishman is.


Another thing to remember is to keep your money


covered up, except perhaps a penny in the hat. People


won't give you anything if they see you got a bob or two


already."



   Bozo had the deepest contempt for the other screevves


on the Embankment. He called them "the salmon


platers." At that time there was a screever almost every


twenty-five yards along the Embankmenttwenty-five


yards being the recognised minimum between pitches.


Bozo contemptuously pointed out an old white-bearded


screever fifty yards away.



   "You see that silly old fool? He's bin doing the same


picture every day for ten years. 'A faithful friend' he calls


it. It's of a dog pulling a child out of the water. The silly


old bastard can't draw any better than a child of ten. He's


learned just that one picture by rule of thumb, like you


learn to put a puzzle together. There's a lot of that sort


about here. They come pinching my ideas sometimes; but


I don't care; the silly s can't think of anything for


themselves, so I'm always ahead of them. The whole


thing with cartoons is being up to date. Once a child got


its head stuck in the railings of Chelsea Bridge. Well, I


heard about it, and my cartoon was on the pavement


before they'd got the child's head out of the railings.


Prompt, I am."



   Bozo seemed an interesting man, and I was anxious to see


more of him. That evening I went down to the


Embankment to meet him, as he had arranged to take


Paddy and myself to a lodging-house south of the river.


Bozo washed his pictures off the pavement and counted


his takings-it was about sixteen shillings, of which he said


twelve or thirteen would be profit. We


walked down into Lambeth. Bozo limped slowly, with a


queer crablike gait, half sideways, dragging his smashed


foot behind him. He carried a stick in each hand and slung


his box of colours over his shoulder. As we were crossing


the bridge he stopped in one of the alcoves to rest. He fell


silent for a minute or two, and to my surprise I saw that he


was looking at the stars. He touched my arm and pointed


to the sky with his stick.



   "Say, will you look at Aldebaran! Look at the colour.


Like a ------------


     great blood orange!"



   From the way he spoke he might have been an art critic


in a picture gallery. I was astonished. I confessed that I


did not know which Aldebaran was, indeed, I had never


even noticed that the stars were of different colours. Bozo


began to give me some elementary hints on astronomy,


pointing out the chief constellations. He seemed


concerned at my ignorance. I said to him, surprised:



   "You seem to know a lot about stars."



   "Not a great lot. I know a bit, though. I got two letters


from the Astronomer Royal thanking me for writing about


meteors. Now and again I go out at night and watch for


meteors. The stars are a free show; it don't cost anything


to use your eyes."



   "What a good idea! I should never have thought of it."



   "Well, you got to take an interest in something. It don't


follow that because a man's on the road he can't think of


anything but tea-and-two-slices."



   "But isn't it very hard to take an interest in things-


things like stars-living this life?"



   "Screeving, you mean? Not necessarily. It don't need


turn you into a bloody rabbit-that is, not if you set your


mind to it."



   "It seems to have that effect on most people."



   "Of course. Look at Paddy-a tea-swilling old moocher,


only fit to scrounge for fag-ends. That's the way most of


them go. I despise them. But you don't need to get like that.


If you've got any education, it don't matter to you if


you're on the road for the rest of your life."



   "Well, I've found just the contrary," I said. "It seems to


me that when you take a man's money away he's fit for


nothing from that moment."



   "No, not necessarily. If you set yourself to it, you can


live the same life, rich or poor. You 'can still keep on with


your books and your ideas. You just got to say to yourself,



   'I'm a free man in here' "-he tapped his forehead-"and


you're all right."



   Bozo talked further in the same strain, and I listened


with attention. He seemed a very unusual screever, and he


was, moreover, the first person I had heard maintain that


poverty did not matter. I saw a good deal of him during


the next few days, for several times it rained and he could


not work. He told me the history of his life, and it was a


curious one.



   The son of a bankrupt bookseller, he had gone to work


as a house-painter at eighteen, and then served three years


in France and India during the war. After the war he had


found a house-painting job in Paris, and had stayed there


several years. France suited him better than England (he


despised the English), and he had been doing well in


Paris, saving money, and engaged to a French girl. One


day the girl was crushed to death under the wheels of an


omnibus. Bozo went on the drink for a week, and then


returned to work, rather shaky; the same morning he fell


from a stage on which he was working, forty feet on to the


pavement, and smashed his right foot to pulp. For some


reason he received only sixty pounds compensation. He


returned to England, spent his money in looking for jobs,


tried hawking books in Middlesex Street market, then


tried selling toys from a tray, and finally settled down as


a screever. He had lived hand to mouth ever since, half


starved throughout the winter, and often sleeping in the


spike or on the Embankment. When I knew him he


owned nothing but the clothes he stood up in, and his


drawing materials and a few books. The clothes were the


usual beggar's rags, but he wore a collar and tie, of


which he was rather proud. The collar, a year or more


old, was constantly "going" round the neck, and Bozo


used to patch it with bits cut from the tail of his shirt so


that the shirt had scarcely any tail left. His damaged leg


was getting worse and would probably have to be


amputated, and his knees, from kneeling on the stones,


had pads of skin on them as thick as boot-soles. There


was, clearly, no future for him but beggary and a death


in the workhouse.



   With all this, he had neither fear, nor regret, nor


shame, nor self-pity. He had faced his position, and


made a philosophy for himself. Being a beggar, he said,


was not his fault, and he refused either to have any


compunction about it or to let it trouble him. He was the


enemy of society, and quite ready to take to crime if he


saw a good opportunity. He _ refused on principle to be


thrifty. In the summer he saved nothing, spending his


surplus earnings on drink, as he did not care about


women. If he was penniless when winter came on, then


society must look after him. He was ready to extract


every penny he could from charity, provided that he was


not expected to say thank you for it. He avoided


religious charities, however, for he said that it stuck in


his throat to sing hymns for buns.


He had various other points of honour; for instance, it


was his boast that never in his life, even when starving,


had he picked up a cigarette end. He considered himself


in a class above the ordinary run of beggars, who, he


said, were an abject lot, without even the decency to be


ungrateful.



   He spoke French passably, and had read some of Zola's


novels, all Shakespeare's plays, Gulliver's Travels, and a


number of essays. He could describe his adventures in


words that one remembered. For instance, speaking of


funerals, he said to me:



   "Have you ever seen a corpse burned? I have, in India.


They put the old chap on the fire, and the next moment I


almost jumped out of my skin, because he'd started


kicking. It was only his muscles contracting in the heat-


still, it give me a turn. Well, he wriggled about for a bit


like a kipper on hot coals, and then his belly blew up and


went off with a bang you could have heard fifty yards


away. It fair put me against cremation."



   Or, again, apropos of his accident:



   "The doctor says to me, 'You fell on one foot, my man.


And bloody lucky for you you didn't fall on both feet,' he


says. 'Because if you had of fallen on both feet you'd


have shut up like a bloody concertina, and your thigh


bones'd be sticking out of your ears!"



   Clearly the phrase was not the doctor's but Bozo's


own. He had a gift for phrases. He had managed to keep


his brain intact and alert, and so nothing could make him


succumb to poverty. He might be ragged and cold, or even


starving, but so long as he could read, think and watch for


meteors, he was, as he said, free in his own mind.



   He was an embittered atheist (the sort of atheist who


does not so much disbelieve in God as personally


dislike Him), and took a sort of pleasure in thinking that


human affairs would never improve. Sometimes, he said,


when sleeping on the Embankment, it had consoled him


to look up at Mars or Jupiter and think that there were


probably Embankment sleepers there. He had a curious


theory about this. Life on earth, he said, is harsh because


the planet is poor in the necessities of existence. Mars,


with its cold climate and scanty water, must be far


poorer, and life correspondingly harsher. Whereas on


earth you are merely imprisoned for stealing sixpence,


on Mars you are probably boiled alive. This thought


cheered Bozo, I do not know why. He was a very


exceptional man.




                   XXXI



THE charge at Bozo's lodging-house was ninepence a


night. It was a large, crowded place, with accommodation


for five hundred men, and a well-known rendezvous of


tramps, beggars and petty criminals. All races, even black


and white, mixed in it on terms of equality. There were


Indians there, and when I spoke to one of them in bad


Urdu he addressed me as "tum"-a thing to make one


shudder, if it had been in India. We had got below the


range of colour prejudice. One had glimpses of curious


lives. Old "Grandpa," a tramp of seventy who made his


living, or a great part of it, by collecting cigarette ends and


selling the tobacco at threepence an ounce. " The Doctor"-


he was a real doctor, who had been struck off the register


for some offence, and besides selling newspapers gave


medical advice at a few pence a time. A little Chittagonian


lascar, barefoot and starving, who had deserted his ship


and wandered for days through London, so


vague and helpless that he did not even know the name of


the city he was in-he thought it was Liverpool, until I told


him. A begging-letter writer, a friend of Bozo's, who


wrote pathetic appeals for aid to pay for his wife's funeral,


and, when a letter had taken effect, blew himself out with


huge solitary gorges of bread and margarine. He was a


nasty, hyena-like creature. I talked to him and found that,


like most swindlers, he believed a great part of his own


lies. The lodging-house was an Alsatia for types like


these.



   While I was with Bozo he taught me something about


the technique of London begging. There is more in it than


one might suppose. Beggars vary greatly, and there is a


sharp social line between those who merely cadge and


those who attempt to give some value for money. The


amounts that one can earn by the different "gags" also


vary. The stories in the Sunday papers about beggars who


die with two thousand pounds sewn into their trousers are,


of course, lies; but the better-class beggars do have runs of


luck, when they earn a living wage for weeks at a time.


The most prosperous beggars are street acrobats and street


photographers. On a good pitch-a theatre queue, for


instance-a street acrobat will often earn five pounds a


week. Street photographers can earn about the same, but


they are dependent on fine weather. They have a cunning


dodge to stimulate trade. When they see a likely victim


approaching, one of them runs behind the camera and


pretends to take a photograph. Then as the victim reaches


them, they exclaim:



   "There y'are, Sir, took yer photo lovely. That'll be a


bob."



   "But I never asked you to take it," protests the victim.



   "What, you didn't want it took? Why, we thought


you signalled with your 'and. Well, there's a plate wasted!


That's cost us sixpence, that 'as."



   At this the victim usually takes pity and says he will


have the photo after all. The photographers examine the


plate and say that it is spoiled, and that they will take a


fresh one free of charge. Of course, they have not really


taken the first photo; and so, if the victim refuses, they


waste nothing.



   Organ-grinders, like acrobats, are considered artists


rather than beggars. An organ-grinder named Shorty, a


friend of Bozo's, told me all about his trade. He and his


mate "worked" the coffee-shops and public-houses round


Whitechapel and the Commercial Road. It is a mistake to


think that organ-grinders earn their living in the street;


nine-tenths of their money is taken in coffee-shops and


pubs-only the cheap pubs, for they are not allowed into


the good-class ones. Shorty's procedure was to stop


outside a pub and play one tune, after which his mate,


who had a wooden leg and could excite compassion, went


in and passed round the hat. It was a point of honour


with Shorty always to play another tune after receiving


the "drop"an encore, as it were; the idea being that he


was a genuine entertainer and not merely paid to go


away. He and his mate took two or three pounds a week


between them, but, as they had to pay fifteen shillings a


week for the hire of the organ, they only averaged a


pound a week each. They were on the streets from eight


in the morning till ten at night, and later on Saturdays.



   Screevers can sometimes be called artists, sometimes


not. Bozo introduced me to one who was a "real" artist-


that is, he had studied art in Paris and submitted


pictures to the Salon in his day. His line was copies of


Old Masters, which he did marvellously,


considering that he was drawing on stone. He told me


how he began as a screever:



   "My wife and kids were starving. I was walking home


late at night, with a lot of drawings I'd been taking round


the dealers, and wondering how the devil to raise a bob


or two. Then, in the Strand, I saw a fellow kneeling on


the pavement drawing, and people giving him pennies. As


I came past he got up and went into a pub. 'Damn it,' I


thought, 'if he can make money at that, so can L' So on


the impulse I knelt down and began drawing with his


chalks. Heaven knows how I came to do it; I must have


been lightheaded with hunger. The curious thing was


that I'd never used pastels before; I had to learn the


technique as I went along. Well, people began to stop and


say that my drawing wasn't bad, and they gave me nine-


pence between them. At this moment the other fellow


came out of the pub. 'What in are you doing on my


pitch?' he said. I explained that I was hungry and had to


earn something. 'Oh,' said he, 'come and have a pint with


me.' So I had a pint, and since that day I've been a


screever. I make a pound a week. You can't keep six kids


on a pound a week, but luckily my wife earns a bit taking


in sewing.



   "The worst thing in this life is the cold, and the next


worst is the interference you have to put up with. At


first, not knowing any better, I used sometimes to copy a


nude on the pavement. The first I did was outside St.


Martin's-in-the-Fields church. A fellow in blackI suppose


he was a churchwarden or somethingcame out in a


tearing rage. 'Do you think we can have that obscenity


outside God's holy house?' he cried. So I had to wash it


out. It was a copy of Botticelli's Venus. Another time I


copied the same picture on the Embankment. A


policeman passing looked at it, and


then, without a word, walked on to it and rubbed it out


with his great flat feet."



   Bozo told the same tale of police interference. At the


time when I was with him there had been a case of


"immoral conduct" in Hyde Park, in which the police had


behaved rather badly. Bozo produced a cartoon of Hyde


Park with policemen concealed in the trees, and the


legend, "Puzzle, find the policemen." I pointed out to him


how much more telling it would be to put, "Puzzle, find


the immoral conduct," but Bozo would not hear of it. He


said that any policeman who saw it would move him on,


and he would lose his pitch for good.



   Below screevers come the people who sing hymns, or


sell matches, or bootlaces, or envelopes containing a few


grains of lavender-called, euphemistically, perfume. All


these people are frankly beggars, exploiting an appearance


of misery, and none of them takes on an average more


than half a crown a day. The reason why they have to


pretend to sell matches and so forth instead of begging


outright is that this is demanded by the absurd English


laws about begging. As the law now stands, if you


approach a stranger and ask him for twopence, he can call


a policeman and get you seven days for begging. But if


you make the air hideous by droning "Nearer, my God, to


Thee," or scrawl some chalk daubs on the pavement, or


stand about with a tray of matches-in short, if you make a


nuisance of yourself-you are held to be following a


legitimate trade and not begging. Match-selling and street-


singing are simply legalised crimes. Not profitable crimes,


however; there is not a singer or match-seller in London


who can be sure of &#163;5o a year-a poor return for standing


eighty-four hours a week on the kerb, with the cars


grazing your backside.



   It is worth saying something about the social position


of beggars, for when one has consorted with them, and


found that they are ordinary human beings, one cannot


help being struck by the curious attitude that society


takes towards them. People seem to feel that there is


some essential difference between beggars and ordinary


"working" men. They are a race apart, outcasts, like


criminals and prostitutes. Working men "work," beggars


do not "work"; they are parasites, worthless in their very


nature. It is taken for granted that a beggar does not


"earn" his living, as a bricklayer or a literary critic


"earns" his. He is a mere social excrescence, tolerated


because we live in a humane age, but essentially


despicable.



   Yet if one looks closely one sees that there is no





essential


 difference between a beggar's livelihood and that


of numberless respectable people. Beggars do not work, it


is said; but, then, what is





work? A navvy works by


swinging a pick. An accountant works by adding up


figures. A beggar works by standing out of doors in all


weathers and getting varicose veins, chronic bronchitis,


etc. It is a trade like any other; quite useless, of course -


but, then, many reputable trades are quite useless. And as


a social type a beggar compares well with scores of others.


He is honest compared with the sellers of most patent


medicines, high-minded compared with a Sunday


newspaper proprietor, amiable compared with a hire-


purchase tout-in short, a parasite, but a fairly harmless


parasite. He seldom extracts more than a bare living from


the community, and, what should justify him according to


our ethical ideas, he pays for it over and over in suffering.


I do not think there is anything about a beggar that sets


him in a different class from other people, or gives most


modern men the right to despise him.




   Then the question arises, Why are beggars despised? -


for they are despised, universally. I believe it is for the


simple reason that they fail to earn a decent living. In


practice nobody cares whether work is useful or useless,


productive or parasitic; the sole thing demanded is that it


shall be profitable. In all the modern talk about energy,


efficiency, social service and the rest of it, what meaning


is there except "Get money, get it legally, and get a lot of


it"? Money has become the grand test of virtue. By this


test beggars fail, and for this they are despised. If one


could earn even ten pounds a week at begging, it would


become a respectable profession immediately. A beggar,


looked at realistically, is simply a business man, getting


his living, like other business men, in the way that comes


to hand. He has not, more than most modern people, sold


his honour; he has merely made the mistake of choosing


a trade at which it is impossible to grow rich.




                     XXXII



I WANT to put in some notes, as short as possible, on


London slang and swearing. These (omitting the ones


that everyone knows) are some of the cant words now


used in London:



   A gagger-beggar or street performer of any kind. A


moocher-one who begs outright, without pretence of


doing a trade. A nobbler-one who collects pennies for a


beggar. A chanter-a street singer. A clodhopper -a street


dancer. A mugfaker-a street photographer. A glimmer-


one who watches vacant motor-cars. A gee (or jee-it is


pronounced jee)-the accomplice of a cheapjack, who


stimulates trade by pretending to buy


something. A split-a detective. A flattie-a policeman. A


dideki-a gypsy. A toby-a tramp.



   A drop-money given to a beggar. Funkumlavender or


other perfume sold in envelopes. A boozer -a public-


house. A slang-a hawker's licence. A kip -a place to


sleep in, or a night's lodging. SmokeLondon. A judy-a


woman. The spike-the casual ward. The lump-the casual


ward. A tosheroon-a half-crown. A denner-a shilling. A


hog-a shilling. A sprowsie-a sixpence. Clods-coppers. A


drum-a billy can. Shackles-soup. A chat-a louse. Hard-


up-tobacco made from cigarette ends. A stick or cane -a


burglar's jemmy. A peter-a safe. A bly-a burglar's oxy-


acetylene blow-lamp



   To bawl-to suck or swallow. To knock off-to steal. To


skipper-to sleep in the open.



   About half of these words are in the larger diction-


aries. It is interesting to guess at the derivation of some


of them, though one or two-for instance, "funkum" and


"tosheroon"-are beyond guessing. "Deaner" presumably


comes from "denier." "Glimmer" (with the verb "to


glim") may have something to do with the old word


"glim," meaning a light, or another old word "glim,"


meaning a glimpse; but it is an instance of the formation


of new words, for in its present sense it can hardly be


older than motor-cars. "Gee" is a curious word;


conceivably it has arisen out of "gee," meaning horse, in


the sense of stalking horse. The derivation of "screever"


is mysterious. It must come ultimately from scribo, but


there has been no similar word in English for the past


hundred and fifty years; nor can it have come directly


from the French, for pavement artists are unknown in


France. "Judy" and "bawl" are East End words, not


found west of Tower Bridge. "Smoke" is a word used


only by tramps. "Kip" is Danish. Till quite recently


the word "doss" was used in this sense, but it is now


quite obsolete.



   London slang and dialect seem to change very


rapidly. The old London accent described by Dickens


and Surtees, with v for w and w for v and so forth, has


now vanished utterly. The Cockney accent as we know


it seems to have come up in the 'forties (it is first men-


tioned in an American book, Herman Melville's





White





Jacket


), and Cockney is already changing; there are few


people now who say "fice" for "face," "nawce" for


"nice" and so forth as consistently as they did twenty


years ago. The slang changes together with the accent.


Twenty-five or thirty years ago, for instance, the


"rhyming slang" was all the rage in London. In the


"rhyming slang" everything was named by something


rhyming with it-a "hit or miss" for a kiss, "plates of


meat" for feet, etc. It was so common that it was even


reproduced in novels; now it is almost extinct.' Perhaps


all the words I have mentioned above will have van-


ished in another twenty years.



   The swear words also change-or, at any rate, they are


subject to fashions. For example, twenty years ago the


London working classes habitually used the word


"bloody." Now they have abandoned it utterly, though


novelists still represent them as using it. No born


Londoner (it is different with people of Scotch or Irish


origin) now says "bloody," unless he is a man of some


education. The word has, in fact, moved up in the social


scale and ceased to be a swear word for the purposes of


the working classes. The current London adjective, now


tacked on to every noun, is ---------


     . No


doubt in time---, like "bloody," will find its way into



1 It survives in certain abbreviations, such as "use your


twopenny" or "use your head." "Twopenny" is arrived at like


this: head-loaf of bread-twopenny loaf-twopenny.



the drawing-room and be replaced by some other word.



   The whole business of swearing, especially English


swearing, is mysterious. Of its very nature swearing is


as irrational as magic-indeed, it is a species of magic.


But there is also a paradox about it, namely this: Our


intention in swearing is to shock and wound, which we


do by mentioning something that should be kept secret -


usually something to do with the sexual functions. But


the strange thing is that when a word is well established


as a swear word, it seems to lose its original meaning;


that is, it loses the thing that made it into a swear word.


A word becomes an oath because it means a certain


thing, and, because it has become an oath, it ceases to


mean that thing. For example, ----. The Londoners do


not now use, or very seldom use, this word in its


original meaning; it is on their lips from morning till


night, but it is a mere expletive and means nothing.


Similarly with -------, which is rapidly losing its original


sense. One can think of similar instances in French-for


example,------,, which is now a quite meaningless


expletive. The word---


  , also, is still used


occasionally in Paris, but the people who use it, or most


of them, have no idea of what it once meant. The rule


seems to be that words accepted as swear words have


some magical character, which sets them apart and


makes them useless for ordinary conversation.



   Words used as insults seem to be governed by the


same paradox as swear words. A word becomes an


insult, one would suppose, because it means something


bad; but in practice its insult-value has little to do with


its actual meaning. For example, the most bitter insult


one can offer to a Londoner is "bastard"which, taken for


what it means, is hardly an insult at all. And the worst


insult to a women, either in London



or Paris, is "cow"; a name which might even be a com-


pliment, for cows are among the most likeable of animals.


Evidently a word is an insult simply because it is meant as


an insult, without reference to its dictionary meaning;


words, especially swear words, being what public opinion


chooses to make them. In this connection it is interesting


to see how a swear word can change character by crossing


a frontier. In England you can print «





Je m'en fous »


without protest from anybody. In France you have to print


it "





Je m'en f-----" Or, as another example,


take the word "barnshoot"a corruption of the Hindustani


word





bahinchut. A vile and unforgivable insult in India, this


word is a piece of gentle badinage in England. I have even


seen it in a school text-book; it was in one of


Aristophanes' plays, and the annotator suggested it as a


rendering of some gibberish spoken by a Persian


ambassador. Presumably the annotator knew what





bahinchut


 meant. But, because it was a foreign word, it had


lost its magical swear-word quality and could be printed.



   One other thing is noticeable about swearing in


London, and that is that the men do not usually swear in


front of the women. In Paris it is quite different. A


Parisian workman may prefer to suppress an oath in front


of a woman, but he is not at all scrupulous about it, and


the women themselves swear freely. The Londoners are


more polite, or more squeamish, in this matter.



   These are a few notes that I have set down more or less


at random. It is a pity that someone capable of dealing


with the subject does not keep a year-book of London


slang and swearing, registering the changes accurately. It


might throw useful light upon the formation, development


and obsolescence of words.





                         XXXIII






THE two pounds that B. had given me lasted about ten


days. That it lasted so long was due to Paddy, who had


learned parsimony on the road and considered even one


sound meal a day a wild extravagance. Food, to him, had


come to mean simply bread and margarine -the eternal tea-


and-two-slices, which will cheat hunger for an hour or


two. He taught me how to live, food, bed, tobacco and all,


at the rate of half a crown a day. And he managed to earn


a few extra shillings by "glimming" in the evenings. It


was a precarious job, because illegal, but it brought in a


little and eked out our money.



   One morning we tried for a job as sandwich men. We


went at five to an alley-way behind some offices, but there


was already a queue of thirty or forty men waiting, and


after two hours we were told that there was no work for


us. We had not missed much, for sandwich men have an


unenviable job. They are paid about three shillings a day


for ten hours' work-it is hard work, especially in windy


weather, and there is no skulking, for an inspector comes


round frequently to see that the men are on their beat. To


add to their troubles, they are only engaged by the day, or


sometimes for three days, never weekly, so that they have


to wait hours for their job every morning. The number of


unemployed men who are ready to do the work makes


them powerless to fight for better treatment. The job all


sandwich men covet is distributing, handbills, which is


paid for at the same rate. When you see a man distributing


handbills you can do him a good turn by taking one, for he


goes off duty when he has distributed all his bills.



   Meanwhile we went on with the lodging-house life-


a squalid, eventless life of crushing boredom. For days


together there was nothing to do but sit in the under-


ground kitchen, reading yesterday's newspaper, or, when


one could get hold of it, a back number of the





Union Jack.


It rained a great deal at this time, and everyone who came


in steamed, so that the kitchen stank horribly. One's only


excitement was the periodical tea-and-two-slices. I do not


know how many men are living this life in London-it must


be thousands at the least. As to Paddy, it was actually the


best life he had known for two years past. His interludes


from tramping, the times when he had somehow laid


hands on a few shillings, had all been like this; the


tramping itself had been slightly worse. Listening to his


whimpering voice-he was always whimpering when he was


not eating-one realised what torture unemployment must


be to him. People are wrong when they think that an


unemployed man only worries about losing his wages; on


the contrary, 'an illiterate man, with the work habit in his


bones, needs work even more than he needs money. An


educated man can put up with enforced idleness, which is


one of the worst evils of poverty. But a man like Paddy,


with no means of filling up time, is as miserable out of


work as a dog on the chain. That is why it is such


nonsense to pretend that those who have "come down in


the world" are to be pitied above all others. The man who


really merits pity is the man who has been down from the


start, and faces poverty with a blank, resourceless mind.



   It was a dull time, and little of it stays in my mind,


except for talks with Bozo. Once the lodging-house was


invaded by a slumming-party. Paddy and I had been out,


and, coming back in the afternoon, we heard sounds of


music downstairs. We went down to find


three gentle-people, sleekly dressed, holding a religious


service in our kitchen. They were a grave and reverend


seignior in a frock coat, a lady sitting at a portable


harmonium, and a chinless youth toying with a crucifix. It


appeared that they had marched in and started to hold


the service, without any kind of invitation whatever.



   It was a pleasure to see how the lodgers met this


intrusion. They did not offer the smallest rudeness to the


slummers; they just ignored them. By common consent


everyone in the kitchen-a hundred men, perhaps behaved


as though the slummers had not existed. There they stood


patiently singing and exhorting, and no more notice was


taken of them than if they had been earwigs. The


gentleman in the frock coat preached a sermon, but not a


word of it was audible; it was drowned in the usual din of


songs, oaths and the clattering of pans. Men sat at their


meals and card games three feet away from the


harmonium, peaceably ignoring it. Presently the slummers


gave it up and cleared out, not insulted in any way, but


merely disregarded. No doubt they consoled themselves by


thinking how brave they had been, "freely venturing into


the lowest dens," etc. etc.



   Bozo said that these people came to the lodginghouse


several times a month. They had influence with the police,


and the "deputy" could not exclude them. It is curious


how people take it for granted that they have a right to


preach at you and pray over you as soon as your income


falls below a certain level.



   After nine days B.'s two pounds was reduced to one and


ninepence. Paddy and I set aside eighteenpence for our


beds, and spent threepence on the usual tea-andtwo-


slices, which we shared-an appetiser rather than a meal.


By the afternoon we were damnably hungry and


Paddy remembered a church near King's Cross Station


where a free tea was given once a week to tramps. This


was the day, and we decided to go there. Bozo, though it


was rainy weather and he was almost penniless, would not


come, saying that churches were not his style.



   Outside the church quite a hundred men were waiting,


dirty types who had gathered from far and wide at the


news of a free tea, like kites round a dead buffalo.


Presently the doors opened and a clergyman and some


girls shepherded us into a gallery at the top of the church.


It was an evangelical church, gaunt and wilfully ugly, with


texts about blood and fire blazoned on the walls, and a


hymn-book containing twelve hundred and fifty-one


hymns; reading some of the hymns, I concluded that the


book would do as it stood for an anthology of bad verse.


There was to be a service after the tea, and the regular


congregation were sitting in the well of the church below.


It was a week-day, and there were only a few dozen of


them, mostly stringy old women who reminded one of


boilingfowls. We ranged ourselves in the gallery pews and


were given our tea; it was a one-pound jam jar of tea each,


with six slices of bread and margarine. As soon as tea was


over, a dozen tramps who had stationed themselves near


the door bolted to avoid the service; the rest stayed, less


from gratitude than lacking the cheek to go.



   The organ let out a few preliminary hoots and the service


began. And instantly, as though at a signal, the tramps


began to misbehave in the most outrageous way. One


would not have thought such scenes possible in a church.


All round the gallery men lolled in their pews, laughed,


chattered, leaned over and flicked pellets of bread among


the congregation; I had to re


strain the man next to me, more or less by force, from


lighting a cigarette. The tramps treated the service as a


purely comic spectacle. It was, indeed, a sufficiently


ludicrous service-the kind where there are sudden yells of


"Hallelujah!" and endless extempore prayersbut their


behaviour passed all bounds. There was one old fellow in


the congregation-Brother Bootle or some such name-who


was often called on to lead us in prayer, and whenever he


stood up the tramps would begin stamping as though in a


theatre; they said that on a previous occasion he had kept


up an extempore prayer for twenty-five minutes, until the


minister had interrupted him. Once when Brother Bootle


stood up a tramp called out, "Two to one 'e don't beat


seven minutes!" so loud that the whole church must hear.


It was not long before we were making far more noise than


the minister. Sometimes somebody below would send up


an indignant "Hush!" but it made no impression. We had


set ourselves to guy the service, and there was no


stopping us.



   It was a queer, rather disgusting scene. Below were the


handful of simple, well-meaning people, trying hard to


worship; and above were the hundred men whom they had


fed, deliberately making worship impossible. A ring of


dirty, hairy faces grinned down from the gallery, openly


jeering. What could a few women and old men do against a


hundred hostile tramps? They were afraid of us, and we


were frankly bullying them. It was our revenge upon them


for having humiliated us by feeding us.



   The minister was a brave man. He thundered steadily


through a long sermon on Joshua, and managed almost to


ignore the sniggers and chattering from above. But in the


end, perhaps goaded beyond endurance, he announced


loudly:



   "I shall address the last five minutes of my sermon to


the





unsaved sinners!"



   Having said which, he turned his face to the gallery


and kept it so for five minutes, lest there should be any


doubt about who were saved and who unsaved. But much


we cared! Even while the minister was threatening hell


fire, we were rolling cigarettes, and at the last amen we


clattered down the stairs with a yell, many agreeing to


come back for another free tea next week.



   The scene had interested me. It was so different from


the ordinary demeanour of tramps-from the abject worm-


like gratitude with which they normally accept charity.


The explanation, of course, was that we outnumbered the


congregation and so were not afraid of them. A man


receiving charity practically always hates his benefactor-it


is a fixed characteristic of human nature; and, when he has


fifty or a hundred others to back him, he will show it.



   In the evening, after the free tea, Paddy unexpectedly


earned another eighteenpence at "glimming." It was


exactly enough for another night's lodging, and we put it


aside and went hungry till nine the next evening. Bozo,


who might have given us some food, was away all day.


The pavements were wet, and he had gone to the Elephant


and Castle, where he knew of a pitch under shelter.


Luckily I still had some tobacco, so that the day might


have been worse.




 At half-past eight Paddy took me to the Embankment,


where a clergyman was known to distribute meal tickets


once a week. Under Charing Cross Bridge fifty men were


waiting, mirrored in the shivering puddles. Some of them


were truly appalling specimens-they were Embankment


sleepers, and the Embankment dredges up worse types


than the spike. One of them, I


remember, was dressed in an overcoat without buttons,


laced up with rope, a pair of ragged trousers, and boots


exposing his toes-not a rag else. He was bearded like a


fakir, and he had managed to streak his chest and


shoulders with some horrible black filth resembling train


oil. What one could see of his face under the dirt and hair


was bleached white as paper by some malignant disease. I


heard him speak, and he had a goodish accent, as of a


clerk or shopwalker.



   Presently the clergyman appeared and the men ranged


themselves in a queue in the order in which they had


arrived. The clergyman was a nice, chubby, youngish


man, and, curiously enough, very like Charlie, my friend


in Paris. He was shy and embarrassed, and did not speak


except for a brief good evening; he simply hurried down


the line of men, thrusting a ticket upon each, and not


waiting to be thanked. The consequence was that, for


once, there was genuine gratitude, and everyone said that


the clergyman was a good feller. Someone (in his hearing,


I believe) called out: "Well,





he'll never be a-----bishop!"-


this, of course, intended as a warm compliment.



   The tickets were worth sixpence each, and were


directed to an eating-house not far away. When we got


there we found that the proprietor, knowing that the


tramps could not go elsewhere, was cheating by only


giving four pennyworth of food for each ticket. Paddy and


I pooled our tickets, and received food which we could


have got for sevenpence or eightpence at most coffee-


shops. The clergyman had distributed well over a pound in


tickets, so that the proprietor was evidently swindling the


tramps to the tune of seven shillings or more a week. This


kind of victimisation is a regular part of a tramp's life, and


it will go on as long as people continue to give meal tickets


instead of money.



   Paddy and I went back to the lodging-house and, still


hungry, loafed in the kitchen, making the warmth of the


fire a substitute for food. At half-past ten Bozo arrived,


tired out and haggard, for his mangled leg made walking


an agony. He had not earned a penny at screening, all the


pitches under shelter being taken, and for several hours he


had begged outright, with one eye on the policemen. He


had amassed eightpence -a penny short of his kip. It was


long past the hour for paying, and he had only managed to


slip indoors when the deputy was not looking; at any


moment he might be caught and turned out, to sleep on the


Embankment. Bozo took the things out of his pockets and


looked them over, debating what to sell. He decided on his


razor, took it round the kitchen, and in a few minutes he


had sold it for threepence-enough to pay his kip, buy a


basin of tea, and leave a halfpenny over.



   Bozo got his basin of tea and sat down by the fire to


dry his clothes. As he drank the tea I saw that he was


laughing to himself, as though at some good joke.


Surprised, I asked him what he had to laugh at.



   "It's bloody funny!" he said. "It's funny enough for





Punch


. What do you think I been and done?"



   "What?"



   "Sold my razor without having a shave first: Of all


the fools!"



   He had not eaten since the morning, had walked several


miles with a twisted leg, his clothes were drenched, and he


had a halfpenny between himself and starvation. With all


this, he could laugh over the loss of his razor. One could


not help admiring him.





                           XXXIV





THE next morning, our money being at an end, Paddy and


I set out for the spike. We went southward by the Old


Kent Road, making for Cromley; we could not go to a


London spike, for Paddy had been in one recently and did


not care to risk going again. It was a sixteen-mile walk


over asphalt, blistering to the heels, and we were acutely


hungry. Paddy browsed the pavement, laying up a store of


cigarette ends against his time in the spike. In the end his


perseverance was rewarded, for he picked up a penny. We


bought a large piece of stale bread, and devoured it as we


walked.



   When we got to Cromley, it was too early to go the


spike, and we walked several miles farther, to a plantation


beside a meadow, where one could sit down. It was a


regular caravanserai of tramps-one could tell it by the


worn grass and the sodden newspaper and rusty cans that


they had left behind. Other tramps were arriving by ones


and twos. It was jolly autumn weather. Near by, a deep


bed of tansies was growing; it seems to me that even now


I can smell the sharp reek of those tansies, warring with


the reek of tramps. In the meadow two carthorse colts, raw


sienna colour with white manes and tails, were nibbling at


a gate. We sprawled about on the ground, sweaty and ex-


hausted. Someone managed to find dry sticks and get a


fire going, and we all had milkless tea out of a tin "drum"


which was passed round.



   Some of the tramps began telling stories. One of them,


Bill, was an interesting type, a genuine sturdy beggar of


the old breed, strong as Hercules and a frank foe of work.


He boasted that with his great strength he


could get a navvying job any time he liked, but as soon as


he drew his first week's wages he went on a terrific drunk


and was sacked. Between whiles he "mooched," chiefly


from shopkeepers. He talked like this:



   "I ain't goin' far in ---Kent. Kent's a tight county,


Kent is. There's too many bin' moochin' about 'ere. The


---bakers get so as they'll throw


their bread away sooner'n give it you. Now Oxford, that's


the place for moochin', Oxford is. When I was in Oxford I


mooched bread, and I mooched bacon, and I mooched


beef, and every night I mooched tanners for my kip off of


the students. The last night I was twopence short of my


kip, so I goes up to a parson and mooches 'im for


threepence. He give me threepence, and the next moment


he turns round and gives me in charge for beggin'. 'You


bin beggin',' the copper says. 'No I ain't,' I says, 'I was


askin' the gentlemen the time,' I says. The copper starts


feelin' inside my coat, and he pulls out a pound of meat


and two loaves of bread. 'Well, what's all this, then?' he


says. 'You better come 'long to the station,' he says. The


beak give me seven days. I don't mooch from no more


---parsons. But Christ! what do I


care for a lay-up of seven days?" etc. etc.



   It seemed that his whole life was this-a round of


mooching, drunks and lay-ups. He laughed as he talked of


it, taking it all for a tremendous joke. He looked as though


he made a poor thing out of begging, for he wore only a


corduroy suit, scarf and capno socks or linen. Still, he was


fat and jolly, and he even smelt of beer, a most unusual


smell in a tramp nowadays.



   Two of the tramps had been in Cromley spike recently,


and they told a ghost story connected with it. Years


earlier, they said, there had been a suicide there.


A tramp had managed to smuggle a razor into his cell, and


there cut his throat. In the morning, when the Tramp


Major came round, the body was jammed against the door,


and to open it they had to break the dead man's arm. In


revenge for this, the dead man haunted his cell, and


anyone who slept there was certain to die within the year;


there were copious instances, of course. If a cell door


stuck when you tried to open it, you should avoid that cell


like the plague, for it was the haunted one.



   Two tramps, ex-sailors, told another grisly story. A


man (they swore they had known him) had planned to


stow away on a boat bound for Chile. It was laden with


manufactured goods packed in big wooden crates, and


with the help of a docker the stowaway had managed to


hide himself in one of these. But the docker had made a


mistake about the order in which the crates were to be


loaded. The crane gripped the stowaway, swung him aloft,


and deposited him-at the very bottom of the hold, beneath


hundreds of crates. No one discovered what had happened


until the end of the voyage, when they found the


stowaway rotting, dead of suffocation.



   Another tramp told the story of Gilderoy, the Scottish


robber. Gilderoy was the man who was condemned to be


hanged, escaped, captured the judge who had sentenced


him, and (splendid fellow!) hanged him. The tramps liked


the story, of course, but the interesting thing was to see


that they had got it all wrong. Their version was that


Gilderoy escaped to America, whereas in reality he was


recaptured and put to death. The story had been amended,


no doubt deliberately; just as children amend the stories of


Samson and Robin Hood, giving them happy endings


which are quite imaginary.



   This set the tramps talking about history, and a very


old man declared that the "one bite law" was a survival


from days when the nobles hunted men instead of deer.


Some of the others laughed at him, but he had the idea


firm in his head. He had heard, too, of the Corn Laws,


and the





jus primae noctis (he believed it had really


existed); also of the Great Rebellion, which he thought


was a rebellion of poor against rich-perhaps he had got it


mixed up with the peasant rebellions. I doubt whether


the old man could read, and certainly he was not


repeating newspaper articles. His scraps of history had


been passed from generation to generation of tramps,


perhaps for centuries in some cases. It was oral tradition


lingering on, like a faint echo from the Middle Ages.



   Paddy and I went to the spike at six in the evening,


getting out at ten in the morning. It was much like


Romton and Edbury, and we saw nothing of the ghost.


Among the casuals were two young men named William


and Fred, ex-fishermen from Norfolk, a lively pair and


fond of singing. They had a song called "Unhappy Bella"


that is worth writing down. I heard them sing it half a


dozen times during the next two days, and I managed to


get it by heart, except a line or two which I have guessed.


It ran:




     Bella was young and Bella was fair With



     bright blue eyes and golden hair, O



     unhappy Bella!



     Her step was light and her heart was gay, But



     she had no sense, and one fine day She got



     herself put in the family way



     By a wicked, heartless, cruel deceiver.




     Poor Bella was young, she didn't believe That



     the world is hard and men deceive, 0 unhappy



     Bella!



     She said, "My man will do what's just, He'll



     marry me now, because he must"; Her heart



     was full of loving trust



     In a wicked, heartless, cruel deceiver.




     She went to his house; that dirty skunk Had



     packed his bags and done a bunk, O unhappy



     Bella!



     Her landlady said, "Get out, you whore,



     I won't have your sort a-darkening my door." Poor



     Bella was put to affliction sore




 By a wicked, heartless, cruel deceiver.




     All night she tramped the cruel snows, What she



     must have suffered nobody knows, O unhappy



     Bella!



     And when the morning dawned so red, Alas,



     alas, poor Bella was dead,



     Sent so young to her lonely bed



     By a wicked, heartless, cruel deceiver.




     So thus, you see, do what you will, The



     fruits of sin are suffering still, O unhappy



     Bella!



     As into the grave they laid her low, The men



     said, "Alas, but life is so," But the women



     chanted, sweet and low, "It's all the men, the



     dirty bastards!"




   Written by a woman, perhaps.



   William and Fred, the singers of this song, were


thorough scallywags, the sort of men who get tramps a


bad name. They happened to know that the Tramp Major


at Cromley had a stock of old clothes, which were to be


given at need to casuals. Before going in William and


Fred took off their boots, ripped the seams and cut


pieces off the soles, more or less ruining them. Then they


applied for two pairs of boots, and the Tramp Major,


seeing how bad their boots were, gave them almost new


pairs. William and Fred were scarcely


outside the spike in the morning before they had sold


these boots for one and ninepence. It seemed to them


quite worth while, for one and ninepence, to make their


own boots practically unwearable.



   Leaving the spike, we all started southward, a long


slouching procession, for Lower Binfield and Ide Hill. On


the way there was a fight between two of the tramps.


They had quarrelled overnight (there was some silly





casus





belli


 about one saying to the other, "Bull shit," which was


taken for Bolshevik-a deadly insult), and they fought it


out in a field. A dozen of us stayed to watch them. The


scene sticks in my mind for one thing -the man who was


beaten going down, and his cap falling off and showing


that his hair was quite white. After that some of us


intervened and stopped the fight. Paddy had meanwhile


been making inquiries, and found that the real cause of


the quarrel was, as usual, a few pennyworth of food.



   We got to Lower Binfield quite early, and Paddy filled


in the time by asking for work at back doors. At one


house he was given some boxes to chop up for firewood,


and, saying he had a mate outside, he brought me in and


we did the work together. When it was done the


householder told the maid to take us out a cup of tea. I


remember the terrified way in which she brought it out,


and then, losing her courage, set the cups down on the


path and bolted back to the house, shutting herself in


the kitchen. So dreadful is the name of "tramp." They


paid us sixpence each, and we bought a threepenny loaf


and half an ounce of tobacco, leaving fivepence.



   Paddy thought it wiser to bury our fivepence, for the


Tramp Major at Lower Binfield was renowned as a tyrant


and might refuse to admit us if we had any money at all.


It is quite a common practice of tramps


to' bury their money. If they intend to smuggle at ah a


large sum into the spike they generally sew it into their


clothes, which may mean prison if they are caught, of


course. Paddy and Bozo used to tell a good story about


this. An Irishman (Bozo said it was an Irishman; Paddy


said an Englishman), not a tramp, and in possession of


thirty pounds, was stranded in a small village where-he


could not get a bed. He consulted a tramp, who advised


him to go to the workhouse. It is quite a


regular proceeding, if one cannot get a bed elsewhere, to


get one at the workhouse, paying a reasonable sum for it.


The Irishman, however, thought he would be clever and


get a bed for nothing, so he presented himself at the


workhouse as an ordinary casual. He had sewn the thirty


pounds into his clothes. Meanwhile the tramp who had


advised him had seen his chance, and that night he


privately asked the Tramp Major for permission to leave


the spike early in the morning, as he had to see about a


job. At six in the morning he was released, and went out-


in the Irishman's clothes. The Irishman complained of


the theft, and was given thirty days for going into a


casual ward under false pretences.




                     XXXV



ARRIVED at Lower Binfield, we sprawled for a long time


on the green, watched by cottagers from their front gates.


A clergyman and his daughter came and stared silently


at us for a while, as though we had been aquarium


fishes, and then went away again. There were several


dozen of us waiting. William and Fred were there, still


singing, and the men who had fought, and Bill the


moocher. He had been mooching from bakers, and had


quantities of stale bread tucked away between


his coat and his bare body. He shared it out, and we were


all glad of it. There was a woman among us, the first


woman tramp I had ever seen. She was a fattish,


battered, very dirty woman of sixty, in a long, trailing


black skirt. She put on great airs of dignity, and if any-


one sat down near her she sniffed and moved farther off.



   "Where you bound for, missis?" one of the tramps


called to her.



   The woman sniffed and looked into the distance.



   "Come on, missis," he said, "cheer up. Be chummy.


We're all in the same boat 'ere."



   "Thank you," said the woman bitterly, "when I want to


get mixed up with a set of





tramps, I'll let you know."



   I enjoyed the way she said





tramps. It seemed to show you


in a flash the whole of her soul; a small, blinkered,


feminine soul, that had learned absolutely nothing from


years on the road. She was, no doubt, a respectable widow


woman, become a tramp through some grotesque accident.



   The spike opened at six. This was Saturday, and we were


to be confined over the week-end, which is the usual


practice; why, I do not know, unless it is from a vague


feeling that Sunday merits something disagreeable.


When we registered I gave my trade as "journalist." It


was truer than "painter," for I had sometimes earned


money from newspaper articles, but it was a silly thing


to say, being bound to lead to questions. As soon as we


were inside the spike and had been lined up for the


search, the Tramp Major called my name. He was a stiff,


soldierly man of forty, not looking the bully he had been


represented, but with an old soldier's gruffness. He said


sharply:



   "Which of you is Blank?" (I forget what name I had


given.)



   "Me, sir."



   "So you are a journalist?"



   "Yes, Sir," I said, quaking. A few questions would


betray the fact that I had been lying, which might mean


prison. But the Tramp Major only looked me up and down


and said:



   "Then you are a gentleman?" "I suppose so."



   He gave me another long look. "Well, that's bloody bad


luck, guv'nor," he said; "bloody bad luck that is." And


thereafter he treated me with unfair favouritism, and even


with a kind of deference. He did not search me, and in the


bathroom he actually gave me a clean towel to myself-an


unheard-of luxury. So powerful is the word "gentleman"


in an old soldier's ear.



   By seven we had wolfed our bread and tea and were in our


cells. We slept one in a cell, and there were bedsteads and


straw palliasses, so that one ought to have had a good


night's sleep. But no spike is perfect, and the peculiar


shortcoming at Lower Binfield was the cold. The hot pipes


were not working, and the two blankets we had been given


were thin cotton things and almost useless. It was only


autumn, but the cold was bitter. One spent the long


twelve-hour night in turning from side to side, falling


asleep for a few minutes and waking up shivering. We


could not smoke, for our tobacco, which we had managed


to smuggle in, was in our clothes and we should not get


these back till the morning. All down the passage one


could hear groaning noises, and sometimes a shouted oath.


No one, I imagine, got more than an hour or two of sleep.



   In the morning, after breakfast and the doctor's inspection,


the Tramp Major herded us all into the dining-room and


locked the door upon us. It was a


limewashed, stone-floored room, unutterably dreary, with


its furniture of deal boards and benches, and its prison


smell. The barred windows were too high to look out of,


and there were no ornaments save a clock and a copy of


the workhouse rules. Packed elbow to elbow on the


benches, we were bored already, though it was barely


eight in the morning. There was nothing to do, nothing to


talk about, not even room to move. The sole consolation


was that one could smoke, for smoking was connived at so


long as one was not caught in the act. Scotty, a little hairy


tramp with. a bastard accent sired by Cockney out of


Glasgow, was tobaccoless, his tin of cigarette ends having


fallen out of his boot during the search and been


impounded. I stood him the makings of a cigarette. We


smoked furtively, thrusting our cigarettes into our pockets,


like schoolboys, when we heard the Tramp Major coming.



   Most of the tramps spent ten continuous hours in this


comfortless, soulless room. Heaven knows how they put


up with it. I was luckier than the others, for at ten o'clock


the Tramp Major told off a few men for odd jobs, and he


picked me out. to help in the workhouse kitchen, the most


coveted job of all. This, like the clean towel, was a charm


worked by the word "gentleman."



   There was no work to do in the kitchen, and I sneaked


off into a small shed used for storing potatoes, where


some workhouse paupers were skulking to avoid the


Sunday morning service. There were comfortable packing-


cases to sit on, and some back numbers of the





Family





Herald


, and even a copy of





Raffles from the workhouse


library. The paupers talked interestingly about workhouse


life. They told me, among other things, that the thing


really hated in the workhouse, as a stigma of charity, is


the uniform; if the men could


wear, their own clothes, or even their own caps and


scarves, they would not mind being paupers. I had my


dinner from the workhouse table, and it was a meal fit for


a boa-constrictor-the largest meal I had 'eaten since my


first day at the H&#244;tel X. The paupers said that they


habitually gorged to the bursting-point on Sunday and


were underfed the rest of the week. After dinner the cook


set me to do the washing up, and told me to throw away


the food that remained. The wastage was astonishing and,


in the circumstances, appalling. Half-eaten joints of meat,


and bucketfuls of broken bread and vegetables, were


pitched away like so much rubbish and then defiled with


tea-leaves. I filled five dustbins to overflowing with quite


eatable food. And while I did so fifty tramps were sitting


in the spike with their bellies half filled by the spike


dinner of bread and cheese, and perhaps two cold boiled


potatoes each in honour of Sunday. According to the


paupers, the food was thrown away from deliberate policy,


rather than that it should be given to the tramps.



   At three I went back to the spike. The tramps had


been sitting there since eight, with hardly room to move


an elbow, and they were now half mad with boredom.


Even smoking was at an end, for a tramp's tobacco is


picked-up cigarette ends, and he starves if he is more


than a few hours away from the pavement. Most of the


men were too bored even to talk; they just sat packed on


the benches, staring at nothing, their scrubby faces split


in two by enormous yawns. The room stank of





ennui.



   Paddy, his backside aching from the hard bench, was


in a whimpering mood, and to pass the time away I


talked with a rather superior tramp, a young carpenter


who wore a collar and tie and was on the



road, he said, for lack of a set of tools. He kept a little


aloof from the other tramps, and held himself more like a


free man than a casual. He had literary tastes, too, and


carried a copy of





Quentin Durward in his pocket. He told


me that he never went into a spike unless driven there by


hunger, sleeping under hedges and behind ricks in


preference. Along the south coast he had begged by day


and slept in bathing-huts for weeks at a time.



   We talked of life on the road. He criticised the


system that makes a tramp spend fourteen hours a day


in the spike, and the other ten in walking and dodging


the police. He spoke of his own case-six months at the


public charge for want of a few pounds' worth of tools.


It was idiotic, he said.



   Then I told him about the wastage of food in the


workhouse kitchen, and what I thought of it. And at that


he changed his tone instantly. I saw that I had awakened


the pew-renter who sleeps in every English workman.


Though he had been famished along with the others, he


at once saw reasons why the food should have been


thrown away rather than given to the tramps. He


admonished me quite severely.



   "They have to do it," he said. "If they made these


places too comfortable, you'd have all the scum of the


country flocking into them. It's only the bad food as


keeps all that scum away. These here tramps are too


lazy to work, that's all that's wrong with them. You


don't want to go encouraging of them. They're scum."




  I produced, arguments to prove him wrong, but he


would not listen. He kept repeating:



   "You don't want to have any pity on these here


tramps-scum, they are. You don't want to judge them


by the same standards as men like you and me. They're


scum, just Scum."



   It was interesting to see the subtle way in which he


disassociated himself from "these here tramps." He had


been on the road six months, but in the sight of God, he


seemed to imply, he was not a tramp. I imagine there are


quite a lot of tramps who thank God they are not tramps.


They are like the trippers who say such cutting things


about trippers.



   Three hours dragged by. At six supper arrived, and


turned out to be quite uneatable; the bread, tough enough


in the morning (it had been cut into slices on Saturday


night), was now as hard as ship's biscuit. Luckily it was


spread with dripping, and we scraped the dripping off and


ate that alone, which was better than nothing. At a quarter-


past six we were sent to bed. New tramps were arriving,


and in order not to mix the tramps of different days (for


fear of infectious diseases) the new men were put in the


cells and we in dormitories. Our dormitory was a barn-like


room with thirty beds close together, and a tub to serve as


a common chamber-pot. It stank abominably, and the


older men coughed and got up all night. But being so


many together kept the room warm, and we had some


sleep.



   We dispersed at ten in the morning, after a fresh


medical inspection, with a hunk of bread and cheese for


our midday dinner. William and Fred, strong in the


possession of a shilling, impaled their bread on the spike


railings-as a protest, they said. This was the second spike


in Kent that they had made too hot to hold them, and


they thought it a great joke. They were cheerful souls,


for tramps. The imbecile (there is an imbecile in every


collection of tramps) said that he was too tired to walk


and clung to the railings, until the Tramp Major had to


dislodge him and start him with a kick, Paddy and I


turned north, for London.


Most of the others were going on to Ide Hill, said to be


about the worst spike in England.'



   Once again it was jolly autumn weather, and the road


was quiet, with few cars passing. The air was like sweet-


briar after the spike's mingled stenches of sweat, soap


and drains. We two seemed the only tramps on the road.


Then I heard a hurried step behind us, and someone


calling. It was little Scotty, the Glasgow tramp, who had


run after us panting. He produced a rusty tin from his


'pocket. He wore a friendly smile, like someone repaying


an obligation.



   "Here y'are, mate," he said cordially. "I owe you some


fag ends. You stood me a smoke yesterday. The Tramp


Major give me back my box of fag ends when we come


out this morning. One good turn deserves another-here


y'are."



   And he put four sodden, debauched, loathly cigarette


ends into my hand.




                       XXXVI



I WANT to set down some general remarks about


tramps. When one comes to think of it, tramps are a


queer product and worth thinking over. It is queer that a


tribe of men, tens of thousands in number, should be


marching up and down England like so many Wandering


Jews. But though the case obviously wants considering,


one cannot even start to consider it until one has got rid


of certain prejudices. These prejudices are rooted in the


idea that every tramp,





ipso facto, is a blackguard. In


childhood we have been taught that tramps are


blackguards, and consequently there exists in our minds a


sort of ideal or typical tramp -a repulsive, rather


dangerous creature, who would





1 I have been in it since, and it is not so bad.




die rather than work or wash, and wants nothing but to


beg, drink and rob hen-houses. This tramp-monster is


no truer to life than the sinister Chinaman of the


magazine stories, but he is very hard to get rid of. The


very word "tramp" evokes his image. And the belief in


him obscures the real questions of vagrancy.



   To take a fundamental question about vagrancy: Why do


tramps exist at all? It is a curious thing, but very few


people know what makes a tramp take to the road. And,


because of the belief in the tramp-monster, the most


fantastic reasons are suggested. It is said, for instance,


that tramps tramp to avoid work, to beg more easily, to


seek opportunities for crime, even-least probable of


reasons-because they like tramping. I have even read in a


book of criminology that the tramp is an atavism, a


throw-back to the nomadic stage of humanity. And


meanwhile the quite obvious cause of vagrancy is staring


one in the face. Of course a tramp is not a nomadic


atavism-one might as well say that a commercial traveller


is an atavism. A tramp tramps, not because he likes it,


but for the same reason as a car keeps to the left;


because there happens to be a law compelling him to do


so. A destitute man, if he is not supported by the parish,


can only get relief at the casual wards, and as each casual


ward will only admit him for one night, he is


automatically kept moving. He is a vagrant because, in


the state of the law, it is that or starve. But people have


been brought up to believe in the tramp-monster, and


so they prefer to think that there must be some more or


less villainous motive for tramping.



   As a matter of fact, very little of the tramp-monster


will survive inquiry. Take the generally accepted idea


that tramps are dangerous characters. Quite apart from


experience, one can say





a priori that very few



tramps are dangerous, because if they were dangerous they


would be treated accordingly. A casual ward will often


admit a hundred, tramps in one night, and these are


handled by a staff of at most three porters. A hundred


ruffians could not be controlled by three unarmed men.


Indeed, when one sees how tramps let themselves be


bullied by the workhouse officials, it is obvious that they


are the most docile, broken-spirited creatures imaginable.


Or take the idea that all tramps are drunkards-an idea


ridiculous on the face of it. No doubt many tramps would


drink if they got the chance, but in the nature of things


they cannot- get the chance. At this moment a pale watery


stuff called beer is sevenpence a pint in England. To be


drunk on it would cost at least half a crown, and a man


who can command half a crown at all often is not a tramp.


The idea that tramps are impudent social parasites


("sturdy beggars") is not absolutely unfounded, but it is


only true in a few per cent. of the cases. Deliberate,


cynical parasitism, such as one reads of in Jack London's


books on American tramping, is not in the English


character. The English are a conscience-ridden race, with


a strong sense of the sinfulness of poverty. One cannot


imagine the average Englishman deliberately turning


parasite, and this national character does not necessarily


change because a man is thrown out of work. Indeed, if


one remembers that a tramp is only an Englishman out of


work, forced by law to live as a vagabond, then the tramp-


monster vanishes. I am not saying, of course, that most


tramps are ideal characters; I am only saying that they are


ordinary human beings, and that if they are worse than


other people it is the result and not the cause of their way


of life.



   It follows that the "Serve them damned well right"


attitude that is normally taken towards tramps is no


fairer than it would be towards cripples or invalids. When


one has realised that, one begins to put oneself in a


tramp's place and understand what his life is like. It is an


extraordinarily futile, acutely unpleasant life. I have


described the casual ward-the routine of a tramp's day-but


there are three especial evils that need insisting upon. The


first is hunger, which is the almost general fate of tramps.


The casual ward gives them a ration which is probably not


even meant to be sufficient, and anything beyond this


must be got by begging-that is, by breaking the law: The


result is that nearly every tramp is rotted by malnutrition;


for proof of which one need only look at the men lining up


outside any casual ward. The second great evil of a


tramp's life-it seems much smaller at first sight, but it is a


good second-is that he is entirely cut off from contact with


women. This point needs elaborating.



   Tramps are cut off from women, in the first place,


because there Are very few women at their level of


society. One might imagine that among destitute people


the sexes would be as equally balanced as elsewhere. But


it is not so; in fact, one can almost say that below a certain


level society is entirely male. The following figures,


published by the L.C.C. from a night census taken on


February 13th, 1931, will show the relative numbers of


destitute men and destitute women:



Spending the night in the streets, 6o men, 18 women.'


In shelters and homes not licensed as common lodging-houses,


1,057 men, 137 women.


In the crypt of St. Martin's-in-the-Fields Church, 88 men, 12


women.


In L.C.C. casual wards and hostels, 674 men, 15 women.



It will be seen from these figures that at the charity




1 This must be an underestimate. Still, the proportions probably


hold good.





level men outnumber women by something like ten to


one. The cause is presumably that unemployment affects


women less than men; also that any presentable woman


can, in the last resort, attach herself to some man. The


result, for a tramp, is that he is condemned to perpetual


celibacy. For of course it goes without saying that if a


tramp finds no women at his own level, those above-


even a very little above-are as far out of his reach as the


moon. The reasons are not worth discussing, but there


is no doubt that women never, or hardly ever,


condescend to men who are much poorer than


themselves. A tramp, therefore, is a celibate from the


moment when he takes to the road. He is absolutely


without hope of getting a wife, a mistress, or any kind of


woman except-very rarely, when he can raise a few


shillings-a prostitute.



   It is obvious what the results of this must be: homo-


sexuality, for instance, and occasional rape cases. But


deeper than these there is the degradation worked in man


who knows that he is not even considered fit for


marriage. The sexual impulse, not to put it any higher, is a


fundamental impulse, and starvation of it can be almost as


demoralising as physical hunger. The evil of poverty is not


so much that it makes a man suffer as that it rots him


physically and spiritually. And there can be no doubt that


sexual starvation contributes to this rotting process. Cut


off from the whole race of women, a tramp feels himself


degraded to the rank of a cripple or a lunatic. No


humiliation could do more damage to a man's self-


respect.



   The other great evil of a tramp's life is enforced idleness.


By our vagrancy laws things are so arranged that when he


is not walking the road he is sitting in a cell; or, in the


intervals, lying on the ground waiting for the casual ward


to open. It is obvious that this is a dismal,


demoralising way of life, especially for an uneducated


man.



   Besides these one could enumerate scores of minor


evils-to name only one, discomfort, which is inseparable


from life on the road; it is worth remembering that the


average tramp has no clothes but what he stands up in,


wears boots that are ill-fitting, and does not sit in a chair


for months together. But the important point is that a


tramp's sufferings are entirely useless. He lives a


fantastically disagreeable life, and lives it to no purpose


whatever. One could not, in fact invent a more futile


routine than walking from prison to prison, spending


perhaps eighteen hours a day in the cell and on the road.


There must be at the least several tens of thousands of


tramps in England. Each day they expend innumerable


foot-pounds of energy-enough to plough thousands of


acres, build miles of road, put up dozens of houses-in


mere, useless walking. Each day they waste between them


possibly ten years of time in staring at cell walls. They cost


the country at least a pound a week a man, and give


nothing in return for it. They go round and round, on an


endless boring game of general post, which is of no use,


and is not even meant to be of any use to any person


whatever. The law keeps this process going, and we have


got so accustomed to it that we are not surprised. But it is


very silly.



   Granting the futility of a tramp's life, the question is


whether anything could be done to improve it. Obviously


it would be possible, for instance, to make the casual


wards a little more habitable, and this is actually being


done in some cases. During the last year some of the


casual wards have been improved-beyond recognition, if


the accounts are true-and there is talk of doing the same


to all of them. But this does not go to the heart of the


problem. The problem is how to turn


the tramp from a bored, half alive vagrant into a self-


respecting human being. A mere increase of comfort


cannot do this. Even if the casual wards became positively


luxurious (they never will)' a tramp's life would still be


wasted. He would still be a pauper, cut off from marriage


and home life, and a dead loss to the community. What is


needed is to depauperise him, and this can only be done by


finding him work-not work for the sake of working, but


work of which he can enjoy the benefit. At present, in the


great majority of casual wards, tramps do no work


whatever. At one time they were made to break stones for


their food, but this was stopped when they had broken


enough stone for years ahead and put the stone-breakers


out of work. Nowadays they are kept idle, because there is


seemingly nothing for them to do. Yet there is a fairly


obvious way of making them useful, namely this: Each


workhouse could run a small farm, or at least a kitchen


garden, and every able-bodied tramp who presented


himself could be made to do a sound day's work. The


produce of the farm or garden could be used for feeding


the tramps, and at the worst it would be better than the


filthy diet of bread and margarine and tea. Of course, the


casual wards could never be quite selfsupporting, but they


could go a long way towards it, and the rates would


probably benefit in the long run. It must be remembered


that under the present system tramps are as dead a loss to


the country as they could possibly be, for they do not only


do no work, but they live on a diet that is bound to


undermine their health; the system, therefore, loses lives


as well as money. A



1 In fairness it must be added that a few of the casual wards have been


improved recently, at least from the point of view of sleeping


accommodation. But most of them are the same as ever, and there has


been no real improvement in the food.




scheme which fed them decently, and made them produce


at least a part of their own food, would be worth trying.



   It may be objected that a farm or even a garden could


not be run with casual labour. But there is no real reason


why tramps should only stay a day at each casual ward;


they might stay a month or even a year, if there were work


for them to do. The constant circulation of tramps is


something quite artificial. At present a tramp is an


expense to the rates, and the object of each workhouse is


therefore to push him on to the next; hence the rule that he


can stay only one night. If he returns within a month he is


penalised by being confined for a week, and, as this is


much the same as being in prison, naturally he keeps


moving. But if he represented labour to the workhouse,


and the workhouse represented sound food to him, it


would be another matter. The workhouses would develop


into partially self-supporting institutions, and the tramps,


settling down here or there according as they were needed,


would cease to be tramps. They would be doing something


comparatively useful, getting decent food, and living a


settled life. By degrees, if the scheme worked well, they


might even cease to be regarded as paupers, and be able to


marry and take a respectable place in society.



   This is only a rough idea, and there are some obvious


objections to it. Nevertheless, it does suggest a way of


improving the status of tramps without piling new burdens


on the rates. And the solution must, in any case, be


something of this kind. For the question is, what to do


with men who are underfed and idle; and the answer-to


make them grow their own food - imposes itself


automatically.




                       XXXVII



A WORD about the sleeping accommodation open to


a homeless person in London. At present it is impossible


to get a





bed in any non-charitable institution in London for


less than sevenpence a night. If you cannot afford


sevenpence for a bed, you must put up


with one of the following substitutes:



   I. The Embankment. Here is the account that Paddy


gave me of sleeping on the Embankment:



   "De whole t'ing wid de Embankment is gettin' to sleep


early. You got to be on your bench by eight o'clock,


because dere ain't too many benches and sometimes


dey're all taken. And you got


  to try to get to


sleep at once. 'Tis too cold to sleep much after twelve


o'clock, an' de police turns you off at four in de mornin'.


It ain't easy to sleep, dough, wid dem bloody trams flyin'


past your head all de time, an' dem sky-signs across de


river flickin' on an' off in your eyes. De cold's cruel. Dem


as sleeps dere generally wraps demselves


up in newspaper, but it don't do much good. You'd


be bloody lucky if you got t'ree hours' sleep."



   I have slept on the Embankment and found that it


corresponded to Paddy's description. It is, however,


much better than not sleeping at all, which is the alter-


native if you spend the night in the streets, elsewhere


than on the Embankment. According to the law in


London, you may sit down for the night, but the police


must move you on if they see you asleep; the Embank


ment and one or two odd corners (there is one behind


the Lyceum Theatre) are special exceptions. This law


is evidently a piece of wilful offensiveness. Its object, so it


is said, is to prevent people from dying of exposure;


but clearly if a man has no home and is going to die of


exposure, die he will, asleep or awake. In Paris there is no


such law. There, people sleep by the score under the Seine


bridges, and in doorways, and on benches in the squares,


and round the ventilating shafts of the Metro, and even


inside the Metro stations. It does no apparent harm. No


one will spend a night in the street if he can possibly help


it, and if he is going to stay out of doors he might as well


be allowed to sleep, if he can.



   2. The Twopenny Hangover. This comes a little


higher than the Embankment. At the Twopenny Hang


over, the lodgers sit in a row on a bench; there is a rope


in front of them, and they lean on this as though


leaning over a fence. A man, humorously called the valet,


cuts the rope at five in the morning. I have never


been there myself, but Bozo had been there often. I asked


him whether anyone could possibly sleep in such


an attitude, and he said that it was more comfortable


than it sounded-at any rate, better than the bare


floor. There are similar shelters in Paris, but the charge


there is only twenty-five centimes (a halfpenny) instead


of twopence.



   3. The Coffin, at fourpence a night. At the Coffin


you sleep in a wooden box, with a tarpaulin for cover


ing. It is cold, and the worst thing about it are the bugs,


which, being enclosed in a box, you cannot escape.



   Above this come the common lodging-houses, with


charges varying between sevenpence and one and a


penny a night. The best are the Rowton Houses, where


the charge is a shilling, for which you get a cubicle to


yourself, and the use of excellent bathrooms. You can


also pay half a crown for a "special," which is practi


cally hotel accommodation. The Rowton Houses are


splendid buildings, and the only objection to them


is the strict discipline, with rules against cooking, card


playing, etc. Perhaps the best advertisement for the


Rowton Houses is the fact that they are always full to


overflowing. The Bruce Houses, at one and a penny, are


also excellent.



   Next best, in point of cleanliness, are the Salvation


Army hostels, at sevenpence or eightpence. They vary (I


have been in one or two that were not very unlike common


lodging-houses), but most of them are clean, and they


have good bathrooms; you have to pay extra for a bath,


however. You can get a cubicle for a shilling. In the


eightpenny dormitories the beds are comfortable, but


there are so many of them (as a rule at least forty to a


room), and so close together, that it is impossible to get a


quiet night. The numerous restrictions stink of prison and


charity. The Salvation Army hostels would only appeal to


people who put cleanliness before anything else.



   Beyond this there are the ordinary common lodging-


houses. Whether you pay sevenpence or a shilling, they


are all stuffy and noisy, and the beds are uniformly dirty


and uncomfortable. What redeems them are their





laissez-





faire


 atmosphere and the warm homelike kitchens where


one can lounge at all hours of the day or night. They are


squalid dens, but some kind of social life is possible in


them. The women's lodging-houses are said to be generally


worse than the men's, and there are very few houses with


accommodation for married couples. In fact, it is nothing


out of the common for a homeless man to sleep in one


lodging-house and his wife in another.



   At this moment at least fifteen thousand people in


London are living in common lodging-houses. For an


unattached man earning two pounds a week, or less, a


lodging-house is a great convenience. He could hardly get


a furnished room so cheaply, and the lodging-house gives


him free firing, a bathroom of sorts, and plenty


of society. As for the dirt, it is a minor evil. The really bad


fault of lodging-houses is that they are places in which


one pays to sleep, and in which sound sleep is impossible.


All one gets for one's money is a bed measuring five feet


six by two feet six, with a hard convex mattress and a


pillow like a block of wood, covered by one cotton


counterpane and two grey, stinking sheets. In winter there


are blankets, but never enough. And this bed is in a room


where there are never less than five, and sometimes fifty


or sixty beds, a yard or two apart. Of course, no one can


sleep soundly in such circumstances. The only other


places where people are herded like this are barracks and


hospitals. In the public wards of a hospital no one even


hopes to sleep well. In barracks the soldiers are crowded,


but they have good beds, and they are healthy; in a


common lodginghouse nearly all the lodgers have chronic


coughs, and a large number have bladder diseases which


make them get up at all the hours of the night. The result


is a perpetual racket, making sleep impossible. So far as


my observation goes, no one in a lodging-house sleeps


more than five hours a night-a damnable swindle when


one has paid sevenpence or more.



   Here legislation could accomplish something. At


present there is all manner of legislation by the L.C.C..


about lodging-houses, but it is not done in the interests of


the lodgers. The L.C.C. only exert themselves to forbid


drinking, gambling, fighting, etc. etc. There is no law to


say that the beds in a lodging-house must be comfortable.


This would be quite an easy thing to enforce-much easier,


for instance, than restrictions upon gambling. The


lodging-house keepers should be compelled to provide


adequate bedclothes and better mattresses, and above all


to divide their dormitories into cubicles. It does not matter


how small a cubicle is,


the important thing is that a man should be alone when


he sleeps. These few changes, strictly enforced, would


make an enormous difference. It is not impossible to make


a lodging-house reasonably comfortable at the usual rates


of payment. In the Croydon municipal lodging-house,


where the charge is only ninepence, there are cubicles,


good beds, chairs (a very rare luxury in lodging-houses),


and kitchens above ground instead of in a cellar. There is


no reason why every ninepenny lodging-house should not


come up to this standard.



   Of course, the owners of lodging-houses would be


opposed





en bloc to any improvement, for their present


business is an immensely profitable one. The average


house takes five or ten pounds a night, with no bad debts


(credit being strictly forbidden), and except for rent the


expenses are small. Any improvement would mean less


crowding, and hence less profit. Still, the excellent


municipal lodging-house at Croydon shows how well one


can be served for ninepence. A few welldirected laws could


make these conditions general. If the authorities are going


to concern themselves with lodging-houses at all, they


ought to start by making them more comfortable, not by


silly restrictions that would never be tolerated in a hotel.




                     XXXVIII



AFTER we left the spike at Lower Binfield, Paddy and I


earned half a crown at weeding and sweeping in


somebody's garden, stayed the night at Cromley, and


walked back to London. I parted from Paddy a day or two


later. B. lent me a final two pounds, and, as I had only


another eight days to hold out, that was the end


of my troubles. My tame imbecile turned out worse than I


had expected, but not bad enough to make me wish myself


back in the spike or the Auberge de Jehan Cottard.



   Paddy set out for Portsmouth, where he had a friend


who might conceivably find work for him, and I have never


seen him since. A short time ago I was told that he had


been run over and killed, but perhaps my informant was


mixing him up with someone else. I had news of Bozo only


three days ago. He is in Wandsworth -fourteen days for


begging. I do not suppose prison worries him very much.



   My story ends here. It is a fairly trivial story, and I can


only hope that it has been interesting in the same way as


a travel diary is interesting. I can at least say, Here is the


world that awaits you if you are ever penniless. Some day I


want to explore -that world more thoroughly. I should like


to know people like Mario and Paddy and Bill the


moocher, not from casual encounters, but intimately; I


should like to understand what really goes on in the souls


of plongeurs and tramps and Embankment sleepers. At


present I do not feel that I have seen more than the fringe


of poverty.



   Still I can point to one or two things I have definitely


learned by being hard up. I shall never again think that all


tramps are drunken scoundrels, nor expect a beggar to be


grateful when I give him a penny, nor be surprised if men


out of work lack energy, nor subscribe to the Salvation


Army, nor pawn my clothes, nor refuse a handbill, nor


enjoy a meal at a smart restaurant. That is a beginning.